INTRODUCTION TO THE ARCHIVES OF THE VERENIGDE OOSTINDISCHE COMPAGNIE 
 
PREFACE 
 
 The archives of the Dutch United East India Company (VOC) in the General State 
Archives are among the most important archival material preserved in the Netherlands. This 
importance is not only measured by their extent, which covers about 1277 meters. Their 
contents are of incalculable value for historiography. The impressive quantity of documents not 
only provides information about the commercial, financial and diplomatic activities of the 
Company, but is also very significant for the history of the Netherlands and for those countries 
and regions in Asia where the VOC was established. These considerations form the foundation 
of this publication. In view of the large number or users from outside the Netherlands, we have 
thought it practical to include the introduction and the table of contents in English. 
 This publication consists of two parts: the inventory and the introductory section. The 
largest section is comprised of the inventory of the VOC archives. The appearance in print of 
the inventory brings to a close a long period of arranging and describing. In the last instance 
this was the task of Mrs. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, who worked at the General State Archives 
from 1937 to 1971. By the mid-1960s she had rounded off her exertions on the organization of 
the VOC archives. It is she who gave the VOC archives their present structure. With the 
assistance of the resulting typescript-inventory, which has been in use for years in the reading-
room of the General State Archives- a growing number of historians and other interested 
people have been able to find their way through the complicated VOC archives. 
 In 1988 the plan to provide the inventory with  an extended introduction and to publish 
it as a whole was conceived. The idea was not to produce a completely new inventory. The 
work of Mrs. Meilink-Roelofsz has served as the basis for this book. The classification and 
numbering which she gave have been maintained. The inventory was subjected to a strict 
redaction with the aim of making it more making it easier to consult and more readily 
accessible to users. The number of subcategories in particular has been drastically reduced. 
There is a new description of many of the documents, and the language has been brought up 
to date. A few documents which had not yet been described and some recent acquisitions have 
been added to the inventory. 
 At this point it is appropriate to make a few remarks about the terminology and spelling. 
The term Asia has been used instead of the archaic Dutch term Indië, which was used to 
indicate the octrooigebied (the area under charter to the Company), in other words the area to 
the east of the Cape of Good Hope and to the west of the Straits of Magellan. The spelling of 
personal names conforms to the spelling in the archives, with the exception of the names of 
historically famous people, the orthography of whose names has been more or less canonized. 
Geographical names are used in their modern form, unless the name or the orthography has 
been completely changed in the course of time. It has been impossible to achieve absolute 
consistency in this. Finally, the names of ships have been standardized on the basis of Dutch-
Asiatic Shipping in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries by J.R. Bruijn, F.S. Gaastra and 
I. Schöffer (The Hague 1979-1987), in order to make cross-references possible. Here too, in a 
few instances and for various reasons departures have been made. 
 
The inventory is preceded by a long introduction, which serves as a guide for using the VOC 
archives. 
 As the result of the complexity and size of the Company's enterprises the structure of 
the archives is fairly complicated. The various rounds of administration have also left their 
traces in the classification of the archives. In order to have a better understanding of the 
structure it is very important to become acquainted with the operation and internal procedures 
of the Company administration. This is discussed in Chapter 1. 
 In Chapter 2 the vicissitudes of the archiv es and the earlier history of the present 
inventory are examined. This gives an insight into the way that this cultural heritage has been 
treated in the past and why certain, very extensive holdings have been lost. 
 Chapter 3 is absolutely vital for every user  of the VOC archives. It contains practical 
instructions for the use of the most important series of the Company's archives and indicates 
which data can be found for various sorts of research. 
 The VOC archives in the Gener al State Archives contain all the residue of the Company 
administration of the six chambers in the Republic. Besides these there were other bodies -in 
particular the overseas establishments- and persons who built up archives relating to the 
Company's activities. These form an important supplement to the VOC archives proper. 
Chapter 4 presents a survey of these related archives. 
 Finally, the maps and drawings of the VO C occupy a special position. The VOC maps 
and drawings preserved in the Maps and Drawings Section of the General State Archives have 
come from the VOC archives themselves and from other holdings. Maps and drawings from the 
VOC collection can also be found in other locations. Information about the maps collection in 
the General State Archives and about other collections is given in Chapter 5. 
 
Many people have contributed to the realization of this book. The lion's share of the editing of 
the inventory was undertaken by R. Raben, who was also assumed editorial responsibility for 
the introductory section and for the compilation of the supplement. In 1990 H. Spijkerman took 
over the redaction of the inventory. The contributions to the introduction were made by staff 
members of the General State Archives and by historians from the University of Leiden. The 
English translation of the introduction was made by Mrs. R. Robson-McKillop. For the 
innumerable correction and processing work a large debt of gratitude is owed to all the staff of 
the Eerste Afdeling -above all to Mrs. N. Iterson- and the staff of the Interdepartmental 
Tekstverwerkingscentrum in Winschoten. The project was carried out under the supervision of 
Mrs. J. Pennings, head of arranging and describing of the Eerste Afdeling of the General State 
Archives. 
 
The Hague, 17th May 1992 
Joyce Pennings  
Remco Raben  
CHAPTER 1. THE ORGANIZATION OF THE VOC 
 
F.S. Gaastra 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Of all the trading companies of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Dutch United 
East India Company (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie or VOC), which was created in 1602, 
was indubitably the most successful. Soon after its incorporation the VOC succeeded in firmly 
forcing back the Portuguese, who had established their commercial empire in Asia a century 
earlier, and pretty well eliminating them as competitors in the trade between Europe and Asia. 
The principal competitor of the VOC, the English East India Company (EIC), which had been 
founded in London in 1600, initially lacked the financial capacity, the organizational ability and 
governmental support to offer any real threat to the Dutch Company. It was only at the end of 
the seventeenth century that the EIC developed into a really potent rival, which would cut the 
ground from under the feet of the VOC in various regions in the course of the eighteenth 
century.  
Nonetheless, until the end of its existence as a trading company in 1800, the VOC remained 
the largest of the Asiatic companies.1) 
 A number of factors which had a bearing on the rapid growth of the Dutch Company can 
be indicated. To begin with the capital affluence available in the Republic provided the VOC with 
a substantial head start. By means of this the VOC was able to finance the costly military 
operations which were necessary to win the world monopoly on fine spices. The conquest of the 
Banda Archipelago in 1622 gave the Company the monopoly on nutmeg and mace. It took 
longer to achieve the monopoly in cloves. By extirpating the clove trees on various islands in 
the Moluccas, the VOC succeeded in concentrating this crop in Ambon. The capture of Makassar 
in 1667 meant that the last harbour where European and Asian merchants could purchase 
'contraband' -that is to say traded outside the VOC- cloves had fallen into the hands of the 
Company. The monopoly on the trade in cinnamon was obtained by ousting the Portuguese 
from Ceylon. This took place in two stages: between 1637 and 1642 and from 1654 to 1658. 
 The operations of the VOC were not just conf ined to the transport of Asian products to 
the European markets. In Asia or Indië, as the whole trading area of the Company was known 
at that time, the VOC managed to accumulate the capital to build up a trade network between 
the various establishments. This intra-Asian trade provided a rich source of income for the 
Company during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Between about 1635 and 1690 this 
income was greater than the expenditure; thus the Asian business of the VOC ran at a profit 
and the enterprise in the Netherlands also profited from this. Furthermore, after 1639 the 
Dutch Company was the only European trader with access to Japan. During the seventeenth 
century this commercial connection proved extremely profitable and offered the Company a 
chance to buy up silver cheaply. All European merchants in Asia needed silver to buy textiles in 
India and pepper in the Indonesian Archipelago. Because of its 'Japanese connection' the VOC 
was able to make do with a fairly limited export of silver from Europe throughout the 
seventeenth century. 
 At the end of the seventeenth century ther e was an enormous expansion in trade and 
shipping between Europe and Asia. Textiles from India, coffee from Arabia and later also from 
Java, and tea from China captured the European market. This growth in trade was general; 
other European companies also profited from it. The VOC gradually ceded its unique position. 
The monopoly on fine spices diminished to relatively limited importance. The income from the 
intra-Asia trade no longer compensated for the spiralling expenditure which mounted partly 
under the influence of the rising administrative costs. The result was that year after year 
throughout the eighteenth century the Asian business of the VOC made a loss. Moreover, the 
trade with Japan almost dried up; after 1700 this counted for only very little. The profits from 
the sale of Asian wares at home were still sufficient to cover the pay for the extensive outfitting 
of ships for Asia and to cover the annually recurring losses in Asia, but the financial reserves 
were shrinking. 
 The result of these structur al changes was that the VOC leaned increasingly on sales 
results in the Republic. The financing of the business relied on these sales results and this put 
the Company in a vulnerable position: in the period after the outbreak of the Fourth Anglo-
Dutch War in 1780, when no return fleets sailed home and no auctions of any significance could 
be held, the Company lost its credit in one fell swoop and found itself deeply in debt. After this 
war the Company was plunged into problems on such a scale that it was only able to remain 
afloat with governmental support. The invasion of the French and the collapse of the old 
Republic sealed the fate of the VOC. At the beginning of 1796, shortly after the founding of the 
Batavian Republic, the board of directors had to resign and the management was handed over 
to a Comité tot de zaken van de Oost-Indische handel en bezittingen (Committee for Affairs 
relating to East India Trade and Possessions). The VOC had been nationalized. On 1st January 
1800 the VOC charter, the legal foundation of the enterprise, was revoked. Although the state 
of war in Europe permitted no drastic changes in course as far as shipping and trade to Asia 
were concerned, it meant the end of the Company. 
 The total figures for the two centuries of the Company's operations, for trade turnover, 
shipping and personnel, are impressive. Despite the dwindling returns, the business was on a 
much larger scale in the eighteenth century than it had been in the seventeenth. For instance, 
in total the VOC fitted out some 4,700 ships, nearly 1700 in the seventeenth century and a 
good 3000 in the eighteenth. Between 1602 and 1700, 317,000 people sailed from Europe on 
these ships, while between 1700 and 1795 this total reached 655,000. Trade figures confirm 
the growth of the business after 1700. The expenditure on equipage, that is to say shipbuilding 
and outfitting as well as the money and goods that were sent to Asia, reached the sum of f. 
370 million between 1640 and 1700, and f.1608 million in the years 1700-1795. In these 
periods the purchase prices of the return goods shipped home from Asia reached f. 205 and f. 
667 million respectively; the sales prices of these return wares were f. 577 million in the first 
period and f. 1633 in the second.2) 
 
 
2. THE FOUNDING OF THE VOC - THE CHARTER 
 
The VOC was born in 1602 from a fusion of six small companies. Directly after the eerste 
schipvaart (first fleet) of 1595-1597, which had been organized by the Compagnie van Verre of 
Amsterdam, had demonstrated the possibilities of Asian trade, companies were set up in 
Amsterdam, Rotterdam and in Zeeland.3) These companies accumulated capital for one 
expedition at a time. Nonetheless, there was continuity in the board of directors; the 
merchants in charge or the bewindhebbers (directors) sponsored successive expeditions. Each 
time the ships returned from Asia the investors, who included not only the board but also other 
shareholders or participanten, got back the capital they had subscribed, naturally augmented 
by a share in the profit. These companies competed fiercely with each other, which put 
pressure on the profit margins. The dwindling returns threatened to frighten off investors and 
to endanger the future of the trade with Asia. 
 The directors were by no means blind to this development and co-o peration rapidly took 
place on a local level. In 1600 the Amsterdam companies amalgamated into one Geünieerde 
Amsterdamse Oostindische Compagnie (Unified Amsterdam East India Company), which was 
granted a monopoly on the trade from Amsterdam to Asia by the Amsterdam burgomasters. 
Concerted action was also taken in Zeeland. But co-operation did not extend beyond this. The 
people in Zeeland, for instance, had little stomach for a fusion with companies in Holland; they 
were afraid that Amsterdam would wield too much power in one united company. Moreover, 
new companies were being established in other cities -Hoorn, Enkhuizen and Delft. Therefore it 
seemed as if this mutual rivalry was to continue on into the seventeenth century. 
 The eventual unification into one comp any did not happen spontaneously, but was 
enforced by the government. The Dutch Republic was at war with the king of Spain and 
Portugal. The existing companies, now mainly referred to as the voorcompagnieën (pre-
companies), were unable to play any role in the conflict against Spain and Portugal. One united 
Company could be a powerful military and economic weapon in the struggle. The States of 
Holland under the guidance of Johan van Oldenbarnevelt and, in their footsteps, the States 
General paved the way for a fusion. Eventually, after the intervention of the stadhouder 
(hereditary governor), Prince Maurits, the Zeelanders were no longer able to hold themselves 
aloof. On 20th March 1602 the States General granted the charter by which the Generale 
Vereenigde Geoctroyeerde Compagnie (General United Chartered Company) was created 4). 
The charter was valid for 21 years. Rivalry was now out of the question: the charter laid down 
that nobody except the VOC could send ships from The Netherlands to or conduct trade in the 
area east of the Cape of Good Hope and west of the Straits of Magellan. 
 Many of the other clauses in the charter re ferred to the organization of the Company, 
the position of the board of directors and the shareholders, and to the way in which capital 
could be acquired. These clauses bore the traces of the laborious negotiations which had 
preceded the realization of the charter. The content and elaboration of the terms will be 
discussed in the sections below. Before this attention will be drawn to the compromising nature 
of the charter and to the federal structure, which was so characteristic of the Dutch East India 
Company. 
 Under the charter the pre-companies became departments or kamers (chambers) in the 
united Company. There were six of them: Amsterdam, Zeeland (which had its seat in 
Middelburg), Delft, Rotterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen. Agreement about the share of the 
chambers in the joint shipping and trade to Asia was reached fairly quickly. The Amsterdam 
Chamber was apportioned half of all operations, Zeeland a quarter and each of the four 
remaining smaller chambers were allocated one-sixteenth each. The Zeelanders were 
reassured by this system of distribution which was laid down in the charter; they had feared 
that, should the capital deposited by the chambers have been taken as the basis for the share 
in the management of the business, Amsterdam would have won more than half. 
 The directors of the pre-companies became the directors of the chambers as a matter of 
course. A general board, which was to be put in charge of the general management and was to 
consist of representatives of the directors of the chambers, was placed above the chambers. 
One great problem was how the proportional relationships between the chambers, which had 
now been settled, were to be reflected in the general board. Because Zeeland wanted the vote 
on the general board to be taken according to Chamber -so that each Chamber could have as 
much say as any other Chamber- agreement initially miscarried. Finally the Zeelanders 
consented to a head count in a board which was to consist of seventeen members. In it 
Amsterdam would be represented by eight directors, Zeeland by four and the smaller chambers 
would have one each, while the seventeenth member would be appointed in turn by one of the 
chambers other than Amsterdam. The Amsterdammers had assumed that this board, the 
Heren XVII, would meet in Amsterdam, but a concession was made to the Zeelanders on this 
point. It was decided to introduce an eight year cycle. For six consecutive years Amsterdam 
was to be the meeting place and during this time this chamber would also function as the 
presidential Chamber; after this for two years Middelburg was to be the seat of the Heren XVII 
and then the presidency would fall to the Zeeland Chamber. 
 Now, on paper at least, it was possible to set down in the charter exactly how much 
influence and say each chamber would have, however, practice was to show how this 
complicated structure would take shape. During the seventeenth century the same 
administrative practices with which the directors, often as regent, were familiar in the Republic 
gradually developed. The relationship between the boards of directors of the chambers and the 
meetings of the Heren XVII, who after all consisted of delegates from these boards, was in 
many respects comparable to the meetings of the States of Holland and Zeeland and the cities 
who delegated their administrators to the sessions of the States. Before each meeting of the 
Heren XVII the chambers were sent an agenda by the presidential C
 hamber. Thereupon their 
delegates were given instructions for voting. When important matters which had not been 
included in the agenda were brought up before the Heren XVII, consultations were held. 
 There was yet another aspect on which the charter was a compromise. This was in the 
matter of capital. Because the charter was to be valid for twenty-one years, the VOC was no 
makeshift organization which, as had been the custom of the pre-companies, had been set up 
just for one expedition. Nonetheless, no-one had wanted or dared to tackle the consequences 
of this for the regulations regarding the accumulation of capital. Even before the founding of 
the united Company, the pre-companies had collected money to finance the outfitting of ships 
for Asia. These ships were now amalgamated into one fleet; this vloot van veertien schepen 
(fleet of fourteen ships) was thus the first that was equipped by the VOC for an expedition to 
Asia. Hereafter, the charter proclaimed, opportunities would be offered for the depositing of 
new capital, not just for one expedition, but for a term of ten years, in which period several 
fleets would be equipped for Asia. The shareholders or participanten would get their money 
back in 1612, plus the profit which had accrued up to that moment, and there would be a fresh 
opportunity to subscribe capital for the next ten years. Moreover, it was laid down that as soon 
as five per cent of the original investment had been returned to the Company immediately after 
the return wares brought back from Asia had been sold, there would be a distribution of 
dividends to the shareholders. 
 These stipulations made the accumulation of capital impossible. This did not tally with 
the aim which had featured prominently in the foundation of the VOC: the provision of a firm 
and solid basis for trade with Asia. 
Therefore this provision was more honoured in the breach than in the observance by the 
directors. The shareholders had to wait a very long time for a distribution of dividends and 
there was no restitution of capital after ten years. The original investment remained unchanged 
throughout the entire life of the Company. The States General, who had issued the charter, 
supported the directors in their non-observance of these stipulations.5) 
 In 1622/23 the charter was renewed for twenty -one years. After the shareholders had 
lodged a complaint, they were allowed a little more say, but there were no real changes 
accomplished. Later renewals of the charter often gave rise to political entanglements: various 
towns and provinces seized the opportunity to bargain for privileges, such as places for 
extraordinary directors in one of the chambers, in return for support of the renewal. On these 
occasions in wartime the States General sometimes asked for money or naval support. It was 
only late in the eighteenth century that any doubts arose about the methods employed by the 
Company and the situation in Asia was brought into the discussions held at the time of the 
renewal. But even then this did not amount to any real criticism: in general the Company 
enjoyed the support of the States General and the government strictly maintained the 
monopoly of the VOC. (See Appendix 4 for a list of the charters.) 
 
 
3. DIRECTORS AND SHAREHOLDERS 
 
After the founding of the VOC in 1602, the seventy-six directors who had headed the pre-
companies were placed in control of the new company. The charter which established the 
monopoly and the duration of the business, albeit provisionally limited to twenty-one years, 
altered the position of the directors. They now formed a real board, a managerial group, with 
its own aims, which were distinct from those of the shareholders. Of course they were 
themselves important investors and, as such, their position and interests did not differ from 
those of the other shareholders. But as managers they strove to increase the turnover, and for 
continuity and consolidation, rather than for any short-term profit which would give the 
investors a quick return on their investment 6). In this the directors enjoyed the protection of 
the charter. Only after ten years, thus after the expiry of the first decennial capital account, 
were they required to open the books and to account to the shareholders. 
 The incomes of the directors were fixed at a certain percen tage of the turnover: at one 
per cent of the expenditure on the outfitting or equipages and at one per cent of the profits 
from the sale of the retourgoederen. (return wares). Directorship was for life. Shareholders had 
no influence at all on the appointment of new directors. Directors were supposed to have 
shares in the VOC set at a fixed minimum amount: f. 6000 (in the chambers of Hoorn and 
Enkhuizen f. 3000). This sum was regarded as a surety; the directors were held responsible for 
instances of mismanagement or fraud though it was set down in the charter, that directors 
were not personally liable for debts incurred by the Company. As has already been said, the 
stipulations in the charter which favoured the shareholders -the rapid distribution of dividends 
from the profits made on the imports and the liquidation of the capital after ten years- were not 
observed by the directors. In short, in return for the right that the charter gave the directors to 
manage the VOC, there were few obligations, and even these were not strictly observed. 
 The charter fixed the number of directors at  sixty: twenty in the Amsterdam Chamber, 
twelve in that of Zeeland and seven in each of the smaller chambers. In view of the fact that, 
at the time that the VOC was founded, there were more directors in all the chambers except 
that of Hoorn, for the time being there were to be no new appointments when a vacancy 
occurred. The appointments procedure, which was prescribed in 1602, gave the States of 
Holland, and for the Zeeland Chamber the States of Zeeland, the right to choose a candidate 
from a nomination list of three persons, which had been compiled by the directors still in office 
in the Chamber concerned. Upon the insistence of the Zeelanders this stipulation was included 
in the charter. However, in Holland it was never applied. A few days before the charter was 
issued, the States of Holland, at the suggestion of the city of Amsterdam, passed a resolution 
in which the choice from the list of three nominees was made the responsibility of the 
burgomasters of the city in question. For indeed, the burgomasters had, so ran the argument 
of the Amsterdammers, vaste kennisse (reliable knowledge) of the capacities of the candidates. 
 The Zeeland determination to  leave the choice of the candidates to the States was 
probably prompted in order to prevent problems within their own circles. The situation there 
was more complicated than it was in Holland. Citizens of Veere and Vlissingen had had interests 
in the pre-companies in Zeeland, and these two cities did not want to relinquish their share in 
the trade with Asia in 1602. Finally, after a lot of rows, both the cities succeeded in each 
obtaining two directors' seats in the Zeeland Chamber. Veere lost its seat as early as 1603, 
because the director from Veere, Balthasar de Moucheron, resigned his place. As there were 
thirteen directors still in office, one more than prescribed by the charter, there was no question 
of filling this vacancy. In later years Veere never succeeded in winning back this second seat, 
despite a stubborn battle which recurred every time there was a new appointment. Middelburg 
kept a firm hold on the nine places that it had in its grasp, and the States of Zeeland took its 
side. The States of Zeeland held onto their right of nomination until 1646; after this the cities 
themselves assumed this right, and each city could fill its own places. 
 The outcome of this was that an intimate relationship developed between the regents of 
the cities and the directors. Party factions, political antitheses and cabals could very easily 
infiltrate the boards of directors. However, from the close ties between the city regents and the 
VOC directors, one cannot draw the conclusion that merchants gradually had to make way for 
administrators; certainly in Amsterdam good care was taken to see that business expertise was 
maintained on the board. One of the consequences of the system of appointments employed is 
that in municipal archives there is a great deal of information to be found about the 
appointment of directors. 
 Besides the sixty directors mentioned in the charter of1602, in the course of time 
directors from outside the Chamber cities took their places on the boards of directors. This so 
called extraordinair or buitengewoon (extraordinary) directorship grew up as the result of the 
demands made by various provinces after the States General had granted the VOC some not 
insubstantial subsidies in 1606. Because they demanded to be able to supervise how this 
money was spent in 1613 and 1614 Gelderland, Utrecht, Friesland and the city of Dordrecht 
(als eerste en voorsittende stad, as premier and presidential city in Holland) were each granted 
the right to appoint one director. Dordrecht had al
 ready attempted to obtain influence in the 
VOC in 1602 by organizing a capital investment by a great many of its citizens. The city was 
thus able to achieve this aim in 1614. In 1642, at the time of the second renewal of the 
charter, a similar post was also granted to Overijssel and Stad en Lande. 
 The vicissitudes which preceded the second renewal of the charter (in 1642) also 
offered various cities in the provinces of Holland a fine opportunity to get their hands on a 
director's place. There had already been a quarrel between Dordrecht, Amsterdam and Haarlem 
in 1636. The extraordinary directorship of the first mentioned city had more or less been 
informally transformed into an ordinary one, because the representative from Dordrecht, Elias 
Trip, had moved to Amsterdam during his term of office and thereafter was counted as an 
ordinary Amsterdam director. After Trip's death, Dordrecht wished this situation to continue, 
but, on the basis of the order of precedence among the cities of the States of Holland, Haarlem 
thought that its turn had come and therefore claimed the directorship that had previously been 
held by Dordrecht. During the discussion about the continuation of the charter which erupted 
shortly afterwards, it was made clear to the Company that they had to offer the cities 
something in return for support for the renewal. Haarlem and Leiden came off best; these cities 
secured an ordinary directorship in the Chamber of Amsterdam, but they could only take their 
seats in 1648. Besides its extraordinary directorship in the Amsterdam Chamber, Dordrecht 
obtained a similar place in one of the chambers in the Zuiderkwartier (Southern District, Delft 
and Rotterdam), later only in Rotterdam. Alkmaar was allowed a director who occupied a place 
in Hoorn and Enkhuizen in rotation. Gouda lagged behind a little, but later, in 1665, succeeded 
in securing a place in the Amsterdam Chamber. Much later, in 1696, the Ridderschap of 
Holland secured two ordinary directors' seats in the smaller Holland chambers. These seats 
were counted over and above the fixed number of sixty. 
 Thus, in the time-honoured custom of the Republic the administrative structure had 
become extremely complicated. Moreover, the smaller chambers did not observe the formal 
rules. In the chambers of the Noorderkwartier (Northern District, Hoorn and Enkhuizen), the 
director from Alkmaar was regarded as an ordinaris . This director continued to take his seat in 
whichever Chamber a place had fallen vacant, which meant that the Hoorn Chamber, or as the 
case may be that of Enkhuizen, sometimes only contained six directors from its own city. After 
1669 this same happened with the director from the Ridderschap in the chambers of the 
Zuiderkwartier.7) (See Appendix 5 for a survey of the composition of the boards of directors.) 
 During the seventeenth century various mo difications were made, not only in the 
number of directors, but also in their emoluments and election, and in the role of the 
shareholders. There was a great deal of discontent among the shareholders about the failure to 
honour the obligations laid down in the charter of 1602 with respect to the distribution of 
dividends and the establishment of the capital, as well as about the less than open attitude of 
the directors towards financial matters. Furthermore, suspicions that the directors were lining 
their own pockets at the Company's expense were rife among the shareholders. During the 
lifetime of the first charter this led to blazing rows. When the charter came up for renewal the 
States General made some small concessions to these complaints. First of all, changes were 
made in the way in which the directors were reimbursed. In future the one per cent 
commission would be calculated from the expenditure for the outfitting and from the net, 
instead of the gross, profits from the sales. This meant a drop in remuneration. In 1647 the 
whole regulation was abrogated and replaced by a fixed salary of f. 3100 per annum for the 
directors of the Amsterdam Chamber, f. 2600 for those in Zeeland, and f. 1200 for the 
directors of the smaller chambers. Moreover, in 1623 the directorship was fixed at a three-year 
term, but this ruling was soon disregarded: later on
  it seems that in most instances directors 
occupied their seats until their deaths. 
 Furthermore, in 1623, via a very complicat ed procedure, some control and say was 
granted to the shareholders by the establishing of three commissions of principal shareholders 
-that is to say those from whom it was demanded, as it was of the directors, that they had at 
least f. 6000 invested in the chambers of either Amsterdam or Zeeland and f. 3000 in the 
smaller chambers.8) 
 One of these boards, that of the rekeni ngopnemers (inspectors of accounts), would 
inspect the generale rekeninge (general accounts) which had to be presented for the first time 
after the expiry of the first charter in 1622. After 1647 this financial accountability took place 
every four years, not just in the presence of the inspectors of accounts, but also in that of a 
committee from the States General. 
 The second board of principal shareholders  functioned by chamber and was assembled 
when a directorship fell vacant. By means of affixie van biljetten (posting of bills) the same 
number of principal shareholders as there were directors still sitting was summoned; thus the 
directors and the principal shareholders formed an electoral college which was empowered to 
draw up a nomination list of three persons. In practice once again the chambers followed their 
own rules. In Zeeland, for instance, twice as many principal shareholders as directors 
assembled. In Amsterdam, by contrast, the main shareholders showed little enthusiasm for 
such meetings; usually only a few deigned to put in an appearance. 
 Finally nine principal shareholders were delegated by the chambers to attend the 
meetings of the Heren XVII and participate on their various committees, in which they were 
entitled to make recommendations. Four of them came from Amsterdam, two from Zeeland 
and three from the remaining smaller chambers, which meant that in turn each of these 
smaller chambers had to do without such a principal shareholder as a delegate. Their election 
took place in much the same way as that of the directors: shareholders compiled a list of 
nominations consisting of three persons, from which the local burgomasters made their choice. 
As these shareholders were obliged to swear an oath in the presence of the burgomaster (as 
did the directors), they were known as beëdigde hoofdparticipanten (certified principal 
shareholders). 
 Yet another modification was made to these electoral regulations in 1749. Then, 
following a proposal from principal main shareholders of the VOC, the stadhouder, William IV, 
was appointed opperbewindhebber (director-general). It was now the prerogative of the 
stadhouder to make a choice of new directors and new certified shareholders from the short-list 
of three names. However, neither William IV nor his successor, William V, took any direct 
interest in the administration; they were represented in the boards of directors of the chambers 
and in the meetings of the Heren XVII by a representant.9) 
 Finally, in 1786, when the Company was forced  to turn to the government for support, 
at the suggestion of the States of Holland the board of directors of the Amsterdam Chamber 
was increased by six people. A political battle had preceded this move. The original idea of the 
States of Holland had been several more directors should also be nominated in Zeeland. Those 
directors who had espoused the cause of reform and who had been appointed by the Patriot-
influenced administration would mainly concern themselves with the Asian side of the 
enterprise. But Zeeland opposed this and, as a result, the extension of the boards of directors 
was confined to Amsterdam. In this Chamber the newly appointed directors formed the 
Departement tot de Indische Zaken (Department for Asian Affairs), which was also known as 
the Vijfde Departement (Fifth Department). In view of the fact that the anti-Orange Patriots 
had the upper hand in Holland, initially this appointment was not made by the stadhouder, but 
by the States General on the recommendation of the States of Holland. When the political 
situation altered in 1788 and the stadhouder regained his former power, his rights were also 
restituted in this respect. In 1790 the Zeeland Chamber finally gave its approval to the 
introduction of this administrative body, which from that time on was known as the Preparatoir 
Besogne (Preparatory Conference).10) 
 The invasion of the French and the establishment of the Batavian Republic brought the 
regime of the old management to an end. By decree of the States General dated 24th 
December 1795, the directors were relieved of their office per 1st March 1796. The 
management of the Company was entrusted to the Comité tot de Zaken van de Oost-Indische 
Handel en Bezittingen, which consisted of twenty-one members. 
 
 
 
4. THE CENTRAL MANAGEMENT; TASKS AND PROCEDURES OF THE HEREN XVII 
 
Quite soon after 1602 the Heren XVII established a set working procedure. During the 
seventeenth century this board usually came together three times a year for meetings which 
lasted for one or more weeks. Occasionally there were only two meetings and this became the 
rule after 1751. Between these sessions there were meetings of committees of directors, which 
prepared policy planning for the Heren XVII or inspected the management of the chambers. 
Like the meetings of the Heren XVII these committees, which were not mentioned in the 
charter and which evolved during the first half of the seventeenth century, were composed of 
delegates from the boards of directors of the chambers.11) 
 
 The following commi ssions were active: 
1. A committee for drawing up the annual balance sheet. 
2. A committee for attending and supervising on the auctions of the chambers. 
3. A commission for inspecting the books of the chambers. 
4. A committee which read through the correspondence and documents received from Asia and 
then composed a draft letter for the administration in Asia. This committee, which was 
composed of four directors from Amsterdam, two from Zeeland and one from each of the 
smaller chambers, met in The Hague and was known as the Haags Besogne. 
5. In wartime, the fleet was issued with secret routes and signals. These were compiled by a 
secret committee . 
 
The time of the meetings of the Heren XVII and the subjects dealt with at them were largely 
dictated by the trading and sailing seasons. The autumn session can be considered to be the 
first in the annual cycle of meetings. This was summoned after the return of the return fleet 
from Asia, about the end of August. At this meeting decisions were taken on the following 
matters: 
- The dates of the auctions of the six chambers, the quantity of goods offered for sale and the 
conditions under which these would be sold. This point had to be dealt with quickly, at the 
beginning of the meeting so that there was time to send notification of the auctions to the large 
commercial centres of Europe. Moreover, the auctions themselves could not be delayed too late 
into the autumn, in order to make sure that the merchants would not be prevented from 
dispatching the goods to the purchasers both at home and abroad because of the onset of the 
winter. It often happened that the autumn sessions went into recess for a time so that the 
auctions could be held and to allow the auction committee to do its work. When this happened, 
the second half of the autumn session fell very late in the year; sometimes the Heren XVII 
even met until Christmas or New Year. 
- The number of ships and crew to be sent to Asia. This concerned the ships which from 
September -therefore while the meeting was still in session- until the summer of the following 
year were to sail from patria. Because, of course, the chambers had to have the first ships of 
this equipage shipshape long before September, a provisional decision had been taken on this 
point earlier. In the autumn the definitive list of ships was settled. 
- The quantity of goods to be sent to Asia. This decision was an answer to the eis der behoeften 
(order for supplies) sent by the Governor-General and Council in Batavia. 
- The quantity of gold and silver, minted and bullion, and the amount of copper coinage to be 
sent to Asia. This was in answer to the eis der contanten (order for ready money) received 
from Batavia. The decision about the precious metal and copper coin was provisioneel 
(provisional). In the spring there was a review to see if this needed to be supplemented. 
- The compilation of what was known as the eis van retouren, a list of the products that the 
directors wished to receive with the next return fleet from Asia. Usually a provisional list was 
drawn up first; the definitive eis (order) was only decided upon after the autumn auctions had 
been held. The directors took account not only of the sales figures from their own auctions, but 
of from those in London as well. When the autumn session was interrupted by the holding of 
auctions, a definitive decision could be taken in the second half of this session. Sometimes, 
however, it was left to the directors who attended the auctions to make up the definitive order 
in collaboration with the directors of the Amsterdam Chamber. In a few instances the sale of 
spices in the spring also led to supplement this definitive list. 
- The composition of the Governor-General and Council or the Raad van Indië (Council of the 
Indies) in Batavia and the promotion of high-ranking officials to the overseas establishments. 
The right to appoint somebody a member of the Raad van Indië and commander of a Company 
establishment was the prerogative of the Heren XVII. Often decisions taken on this point were 
no more than a ratification of an appointment which had already been made in Asia. 
Furthermore, this item on the agenda gave the directors of the various chambers the 
opportunity to put forward some protégé for promotion. 
- In all the sessions of the Heren XVII, therefore also in the autumn, surveys were made on the 
financial situation of the chambers: the cash in hand, the credit balance in the exchange bank, 
the outstanding debts and claims. Moreover, in the autumn, and occasionally in the spring, an 
inventory of the stocks of cannon was drawn up. 
- At various times during the autumn session extracts were read from the generale missive 
(general dispatch) from the Governor-General and Council of the Indies, which gave a survey 
of the commercial, financial and political situation of the VOC in Asia. Matters which required 
urgent attention or which the Heren XVII considered could be dealt with immediately were 
summarized in a letter to Batavia. Other matters were referred to the Haags Besogne with the 
rest of the voluminous collection of documents from Asia. 
 
The next meeting of the Heren XVII took place in the early spring, often as early as February, 
or else in March. During this session decisions were made about the spring auctions, at which 
the VOC usually offered only spices for sale. Besides this, the gathering gave the directors the 
opportunity to check work in progress on the outfitting of the ships. This was when the 
definitive consignment of the amount of ready money was decided. Furthermore, in spring it 
was time for the liquidatie en egalisatie van de retouren en van de timmeringe van schepen 
(for the liquidation and settling up of the imports and of the building of the ships). On the basis 
of information supplied by the chambers, the directors checked to what extent the distribution 
system, which had been laid down in the charter, had been observed. As far as the imports 
were concerned this could mean that one chamber had to supply another chamber with a 
certain product or that a financial adjustment had to be made to set the proportions to rights. 
This was not possible with regard to the building of ships. However, later in the year, when the 
new programme was finalized, the results of the comparison and any imbalances in building 
activities up to that moment were taken into account. 
 Remarkably enough, it was often at the spri ng session that a decision was already made 
about the remittance of dividends. Therefore, this was done even before the auction of spices 
had taken place in March, and, furthermore, before the end of the financial year, which closed 
either in the middle or at the end of May. This means that the payments were entered in the 
books of the year still current. It is true that after1669, at the suggestion of the Amsterdam 
Chamber, it was decided to wait until the books had been closed and the balance drawn up 
before assessing the dividend, but as early as about 1684 the old practices had been resumed. 
 Finally, it was at the spring session that the date on which the Haags Besogne would 
meet was decided. The directors who had been delegated to this gathering by their chambers 
had to count on spending quite some time in The Hague. Sometimes the Haags Besogne was in 
session for as long as three months. The return fleet not only brought a generale missive from 
the Governor-General and the Council of the Indies to the Heren XVII, but also copies of the 
correspondence between Batavia and the other establishments in Asia. This correspondence, 
arranged by establishment along with the relevant passages from the generale missiven and 
from letters which had been written earlier on behalf of the Heren XVII was read and replied to 
by the Haags Besogne. The report of the Besogne, which was known as the Haags Verbaal, is 
mainly a summary of the letters which had been read, with a reference to the draft reply, 
which is nearly always included at the back of the Verbaal. Occasionally short remarks were 
added; sometimes a more extensive commentary was gi
 ven, for instance, when the directors 
in The Hague were able to obtain information directly from an employee who had come back 
from Asia. 
 As the Haags Besogne reviewed the navale  magt, the survey of the Company ships 
present in Asia, which was prepared in Batavia, this was the body most suitable for drawing up 
a list of the complete VOC fleet, and on the basis of this to give advice about the building of 
new vessels. During the eighteenth century the directors in The Hague added more details to 
the Verbaal, for instance, those relating to the sale of European goods in Asia. Besides this the 
Besogne found itself tackling a lot of the tasks which the Heren XVII could not, or would not, 
handle in their sessions. The directors in The Hague were also regularly requested to speed up 
or to bring to a close various cases in which the VOC was involved before the Hof van Holland. 
Lastly, the directors assembled in The Hague availed themselves of the opportunity to discuss 
the way matters relating to the equipage were progressing. When the Amsterdam directors had 
not done so during the spring session, they usually presented the Haags Besogne with a 
proposal for sending precious metal with the ships of the current equipage, in anticipation of 
the expected order from Batavia. This last matter was the only item on which the Haags 
Besogne took a decision. All other matters to which the Besogne had turned its attention were 
then placed before the next session of the Heren XVII for deliberation.  
 After this, in June, the committee whose job it was to check the books and draw up the 
annual balance sheet met. On this occasion not only the directors on this committee -two from 
Amsterdam, one from Zeeland and three from the other chambers (thus one chamber was not 
represented)- but also the book-keepers from the six chambers wended their way to the 
Oostindisch Huis of the Amsterdam Chamber. Here, each in turn, the accountants presented 
their books and financial documents for inspection. Finally, the committee drew up the general 
balance sheet of the VOC in patria from the six balance sheets. Among the papers which this 
committee collected were the lists of the goods sold by each chamber, the stocks, the 
outstanding debts and credits, the cash in hand and the credit balance in the bank of 
exchange. Once every four years when, according to the rules laid down in the charter, a 
financial accounting had to be made to representatives of the States General and the principal 
shareholders, after the books had been closed, they were inspected yet again by chamber. 
 From Amsterdam the committee could not rea lly keep a close eye on the accounting. 
This was the reason that now and again a committee was appointed to inspect and check the 
books on the spot. A wide-spread fraud perpetrated in the Hoorn Chamber in 1670 had been 
the motive behind the formation of such a committee. The inspection of the chambers did not 
follow any particular schedule. Sometimes, after a session of the Heren XVII in Zeeland had 
finished, some directors stayed on in order to carry out this task. Then, on their return journey 
to Amsterdam, they inspected the chambers of Delft and Rotterdam, and later in the year visits 
were paid to Amsterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen. 
 
 The third meeting of the Her en XVII took place in the summer, usually in July, but 
sometimes not until August. This was when the draft reply of the Haags Besogne was 
discussed. After it had been approved and any amendments had been made, this reply was 
sent to Batavia in September with the first ships of the new equipage. The summer was also 
the time that provisional estimates were reached about ships, crews and goods for the 
forthcoming season. Moreover, a decision was made on the quantity of precious metals to be 
dispatched on the ships sailing in September; therefore this ruling was also an anticipation of 
the order which would only be received at the end of August and of the definitive decision, 
which would be taken later in the year. In the eighteenth century a provisional eis van retouren 
(order for return goods) was drawn up so that Batavia could set to work as soon as possible to 
assemble the goods for patria; therefore the questions which were decided later in the year by 
the Heren XVII increasingly assumed a supplementary character. 
 On rare occasions, under the pressure of special circumstances, there was not enough 
time to summon a full complement of the Heren XVII. In such instances, a meeting of the 
Halve Zeventien was deemed sufficient. For instance, after the outbreak of the war with 
England and France in July 1672, an extra session of the Halve Zeventien was summoned in 
The Hague, for just one day, 'so as not to cause a stir or be conspicuous'. Weather conditions 
could also cause a great deal of confusion. In 1681 when a severe frost made the journey by 
the directors from Holland to Zeeland impossibl
e, a Halve Zeventien was summoned with The 
Hague once again as the venue to organize the spring auctions. However, these sorts of 
meetings trod on a lot of toes. The Zeeland directors were afraid that the other chambers 
would be all too ready to seize such opportunities to transfer the meetings to The Hague during 
the time that Zeeland held the presidency. Amsterdam had objections to the Halve Zeventien 
because it was composed of four Amsterdam directors, two Zeelanders and four (sometimes 
two) delegates from the smaller chambers. With only four representatives, Amsterdam was 
underrepresented. Moreover, because of the even number of those present, voting could be 
deadlocked. Amsterdam wanted voting by Chamber, in which the four Amsterdammers would 
be permitted to have eight votes and the Zeelanders four or -if the Chamber of Zeeland 
happened to be in the chair- five votes. 
 The growth of the business and the concomitant increasing workload of the Heren XVII 
meant that in the course of the eighteenth century the directors found themselves ever more 
pressed for time. Above all during the lengthy deliberations in The Hague the schedule got 
increasingly out of hand. Sometimes the summer session could only get under way late in 
August and by then the return fleet had already arrived home. This was the time when the 
directors had a lot of work to see to in the chambers and also had to devote their attention to 
the preparations for the autumn session of the Heren XVII. Therefore, in 1751, it was decided 
to cancel the summer session. The multitudinous provisional decisions about the equipage and 
suchlike were left in the hands of the Haags Besogne; from then on the draft missive of the 
Haags Besogne was dealt with immediately the autumn session commenced, in order to limit 
any delay in its dispatch to the minimum. 
 Shortly after the middle of the eighteenth century yet another change was implemented 
in the organization of the central management. In 1755 it was decided to change the pattern of 
the trade with China and to send ships directly from the Netherlands to China. This entailed an 
infringement on the role of Batavia as organizer of shipping in Asia. Furthermore, the trade and 
shipping for China was put in the hands of a separate committee. This Chinase Comité (Chinese 
Committee), composed of directors from various chambers, fixed the equipage for Canton, 
decided how much tea, porcelain and other goods were to be bought, and corresponded with 
the VOC employees in China. After its inception, trade with China was dealt with only 
summarily in meetings of the Heren XVII. This form of organization, by which the trade and 
shipping for one area was entrusted to a special administrative branch, remained an exception 
within the Company, which was not imitated for any of the other areas.12) 
 
 All in all, the central management was ba dly constructed. The Heren XVII did not meet 
in permanent session. The composition of the assembly was constantly changing, and the 
Heren XVII had no administrative staff. Nonetheless, due to the practices which had evolved, 
the administration was a force to be reckoned with. The decisions of the Heren XVII were 
binding for the chambers; because each chamber was represented in the XVII, the directors of 
the chambers executed these decisions. There were certain unwritten rules honoured in the 
selection of delegates to the Heren XVII from the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland, and 
probably from the other chambers as well. In Amsterdam burgomasters and ex-burgomasters 
had precedence over other directors, after this seniority was taken into account. A similar rule 
was applied in Zeeland. However, by no means always did directors avail themselves of their 
'right' of delegation, and certainly when there were sessions in Zeeland it was sometimes 
difficult for the Amsterdammers to drum up the eight members required for their delegation. 
During their term of office many directors will have attended one or more sessions of the Heren 
XVII; a number of directors attended the sessions so regularly that, despite the many changes, 
a certain degree of continuity was achieved.13) 
 The Amsterdam Chamber wielded great infl uence in the central administration. The 
preparations for and the conduct of the sessions of the Heren XVII were matters which the 
Amsterdammers tackled very thoroughly. During discussions of the agenda at the sessions of 
the XVII, the Amsterdam directors already submitted detailed suggestions on such important 
items as the equipage or the order for Asian goods, whi
ch had been given to the delegation. 
During meetings if the other chambers criticized the Amsterdam position, the Amsterdam 
delegation would consult the other directors in the chamber -something that was less feasible 
when the meeting was held in Middelburg; in such cases consultation was by correspondence. 
 Finally, the continuity in the administration was boosted by the work of the Company 
advocates. These advocates -there was a first and a second advocate- acted as secretary to the 
directors and, consequently, were the only permanent high-ranking officials who had a function 
on the central management. The advocate assisted the presidential chamber in the compilation 
of the agendas for the meetings of the Heren XVII and he attended these sessions as well as 
the meetings of the committees set up by the Heren XVII. Besides this, he was in the service of 
the Amsterdam Chamber. The most famous Company advocate was Pieter van Dam, who, for 
more than fifty years, from 1652 to 1706, occupied this office and compiled the important 
Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie about 1700. (See Appendix 6 for a diagram of 
the organization of the VOC.) 
 
 
5. THE ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE CHAMBERS 
 
As the managers of the chambers, the task of the directors was to carry out the decisions 
taken in the sessions of the Heren XVII. Very early in the seventeenth century the chambers 
were given facilities for this work. An Oostindisch Huis, where the directors met, the 
accountants, cashiers and clerks carried out their administrative activities and where goods 
were occasionally stored, was set up in all the cities with chambers. Besides this there were the 
requisite warehouses and complexes for the building and equipping of ships: shipyards, sail 
makers, rope-walks, forges; not forgetting abattoirs, apothecaries and a multitude of other 
businesses 14). The internal organization of the various chambers differed somewhat one from 
the other. When it was all said and done, the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland were 
respectively eight and four times bigger than one small Chamber and this alone made different 
demands on the organization. 
 In Amsterdam the directors usually met tw ice a week, on Monday and Thursday. During 
sessions of the Heren XVII and when there were matters which had to be dealt with quickly, 
extraordinary meetings were added. Many activities were, however, handled in committees. 
Initially the directors followed the practice which had begun in the pre-companies of setting up 
separate committees for each equipage. Directors were appointed for one season or one year 
to a committee for shipbuilding, victualling, ammunition, book-keeping or the sale of goods. 
Sometime around the middle of the seventeenth century four permanent committees, which in 
the eighteenth century were called departments, evolved. When directors were appointed they 
were given a seat on a committee and mostly remained active there for the whole of their term 
of office.15) 
 The various administrative departments and sections of the business fell under these 
committees. The work was divided up as follows: 
1. The committee for the rekenkamer (audit office) was in charge of the chief accountant, the 
clearing office, the pay office and the clerks' office. The chief accountant made up the ledger 
and the journal of the Chamber and he administered the transfer of shares and the remittance 
of the dividends. In the liquidation office were kept the books in which the transactions with 
merchants were accounted for. The pay office was in charge of the extensive personnel 
administration and the scheepssoldijboeken (ship's pay-ledgers) were held there. Lastly, the 
clerks' office carried out the secretarial duties. 
2. The job of the commissie van ontvang (reception committee), often in conjunction with the 
rekenkamer, was to supervise the cashier. This committee was also given the responsibility of 
the buying up the silver and gold which was to be sent to Asia. The cashier and his assistants 
worked in the ontvangkamer (reception office). 
3. The heeren van 't pakhuis (warehouse masters) or, according to their later more dignified 
nomenclature, Departement van de Commercie, supervised the book-keepers in the warehouse 
office. Here a record was kept of which goods had been purchased, which of these were sent to 
Asia, which imported goods had been received from Asia, and what prices these had fetched at 
the auctions. Besides, the directors on this committee had yet another task: they had to 
audition ministers of religion who wished to be considered for an appointment in Asia. 
4. The task of the Commissie van de Equipage (equipage committee) was the inspection of all 
matter to do with shipbuilding and the outfitting of vessels. These directors supervised the 
shipyards, they were present when vessels sailed from and dropped anchor in the Texel roads, 
and were charged with recruiting sailors and soldiers. (See Appendix 7 for a diagram of the 
organization of the Amsterdam Chamber.) 
 
 In the Zeeland Chamber the directors form ed themselves into three committees: the 
Commissie van de Thesaurie (finance committee), of koopmanschappen (commerce 
committee) and the Commissie van de Equipage (equipage committee).16) Here it was also 
the custom to give a director a seat on one of the committees as soon as he was appointed 
but, because equipage and commerce were considered to be much bigger plums on account of 
the possibility they offered for granting establishments to protégés and obtaining emoluments, 
there was a great deal of changing around: if a place on the equipage committee fell vacant, 
very often somebody from the finance committee took it and a newly appointed director was 
placed on the finance committee. The administrative division in Zeeland was identical to that in 
Amsterdam, albeit there were fewer people employed in the various establishments. Zeeland 
also had a chief accountant, a cashier's office, a commercial office and a pay office. 
Furthermore, just as was the case in Amsterdam, there were book-keepers and clerks in the 
shipyards. The office known there as the buiten-comptoir was an office in the warehouse.  
 
 
6. ORGANIZATION OF THE VOC IN ASIA 
 
Although the charter of 1602 was clear-cut and detailed in the way in which it laid down the 
organization of the VOC in the Republic, it was conversely vague about the administrative 
structure in Asia. The charter allowed the Company far reaching rights overseas: the VOC could 
build forts in Asia; employ soldiers; conclude treaties with Asian rulers; and appoint judges. 
However, these rights were not elaborated on: possibly in 1602 it was as yet impossible to 
foresee in what way the authority of the VOC overseas would expand. 
 The first fleets sent out by the VOC after 1602 were much more heavily armed than the 
ships of the pre-companies had been. The armaments were not so much intended to win 
territory in Asia, as to inflict as much damage as possible on the Portuguese. To begin with the 
Company adhered to the practices of pre-1602: the admiral of the outgoing fleet was given the 
supreme command in Asia and all the Company's employees were subject to him, whether they 
were in his immediate vicinity on ships or at some trading post or other. After a few years it 
became apparent that this way of going about things did not have much to recommend it and 
that the Portuguese example -a central authority in one fixed place- was worthy of imitation. 
 In 1609 the directors decided to place the su preme command in Asia in the hands of a 
Governor-General, who was to be assisted by a Raad van Indië (Council of the Indies).17) After 
a lot of fighting Batavia was founded in 1619 on the site of the Javanese harbour town of 
Jakatra. This became the seat of the Governor-General and Council or the Supreme 
Government as the Governor-General and Council were soon designated, and it became the 
administrative centre and rendez-vous for the Company's shipping traffic. 
 The Governor-General was not all powerful ; he was the first in council, but was not 
empowered to take any important decisions without the council. The directeur-generaal 
(director general) was second-in-command; he had supreme control over the entire Company 
trade in Asia. Initially a certain division of labour had been thought out in the distribution of the 
other posts, which gave rise to a great number of double functions. As visitateur-generaal 
(auditor-general) one of the council would supervise the accounts; one would assume the 
function of president of the Raad van Justitie (Court of Justice); another would be put in charge 
of military matters; and yet another would concern himself with shipping. In practice it proved 
difficult to maintain such an organization; there were frequent vacanci
 es caused by departure 
or death. Eventually the aim was to have six councillors besides the Governor-General in office 
in Batavia, while there would also be a few extraordinary councillors, who would enjoy only an 
advisory capacity. 
 The correspondence between the Governor-General and Council and the many 
establishments of the VOC in Asia was apportioned out among the councillors. The generale 
missive, in which the Governor-General and Council reported to the Heren XVII about the state 
of Company business in Asia, was also composed according to this division of the beschrijvinge 
(reports) of the establishments. Each councillor assumed the responsibility for a certain section 
of this missive, after which, naturally, the whole report was laid before the entire Raad van 
Indië for approval and signing. It was also the job of the Governor-General and Council to 
compile the generale eis van Indië@(general order from Asia), in which the amount of monies, 
goods, ships and crews considered necessary for the business overseas was summed up. In the 
sessions of the Heren XVII it served as a guideline for decision-making on this subject. The 
orders from the various establishments were included in the generale eis; the Governor-
General and Council were empowered either to reduce or increase each order according to their 
own insights. For some years during the second half of the seventeenth century, only Ceylon 
was permitted to submit its own order to the Heren XVII. Conversely, the Governor-General 
and Council in Batavia acted as a serving hatch through which the orders from the directors at 
home could be passed on to the establishments. 
 There were great differences in size, economic importance and political status between 
the many establishments or establishments of the VOC in Asia. In their generale instructie 
(general orders) for 1650, the directors distinguished three categories into which the different 
establishments could be divided, a division which also reproduces the difference in political 
position.18) 
 
1. The trade that the Company had won by eigen conqueste (by their own conquest), for 
example the Banda Archipelago and Formosa (Taiwan). 
2. Trade carried on under the auspicies of exclusive contracts which had been drawn up, for 
instance, with the ruler of Ternate, and in Amboina (Ambon and the area around it). 
3. Trade pursued under the auspicies of treaties concluded with Asian rulers or nations, under 
which the VOC traded on a more or less equal footing with the Asian partner. 
 
Earlier, in 1620, on his return from Asia, the Governor-General had made such a threefold 
division. The distinction was somewhat artificial. The exclusive contracts had for the most part 
been exacted by violence so that for example, in the islands in the Moluccas it would be more 
correct to speak of a conquest rather than trade on a contractual basis. 
 The importance and the status of the esta blishments were expressed in the forms of 
address and the salaries of the chief officials. The large establishments, where the VOC also 
exercised a territorial authority, were under the authority of a governor. About 1685 these 
were Ambon, Banda, the Moluccas (Ternate), Coromandel, Ceylon and Malacca; a century later 
the Cape of Good Hope, the north coast of Java and Makassar also had a governor. Other 
economically important establishments such as Bengal, Surat and Persia were headed by a 
director (a title which, in the Company parlance, was associated with trade). In Malabar and on 
the west coast of Sumatra (Padang) there was a commandeur (commander) in charge. 
Cheribon, Banjarmasin and Palembang had residents, while in Japan and on Timor there was 
an opperhoofd (head of establishment). These authorities did not function on their own, just as 
the Governor-General in Batavia they were the first person in a council; they had to make 
important decisions in rade (in council). Also on these councils a certain degree of division of 
labour was apportioned to the members. The second-in-command, the secunde, was usually an 
opperkoopman (chief merchant) and was in charge of trade. Furthermore, the council should 
contain a military commander, the head of the book-keeping and the fiscaal (in charge of 
detecting fraud and other crimes). In practice the composition of the board was rather 
different. 
 
 
7. BATAVIA AS ADMINISTRATIVE CENTRE 
 
All the VOC establishments in Asia (thus including that at the Cape of Good Hope) were subject 
to the Governor-General and Council in Batavia. At the same time Batavia was the most 
important and, for a while during the seventeenth century, the only harbour of arrival and 
departure for ships to and from Europe. Communications between the directors in the Republic 
and the various establishments was also carried on principally via the Governor-General and 
Council and its administrative machinery. 
 There were a number of exceptions to this  rule. The VOC establishment at Gamron in 
Persia and at times the establishments in India corresponded with the directors at home 
overland via the Levant. Besides this, after the founding of the establishment at the Cape of 
Good Hope, there was an exchange of correspondence between the administrators there and 
the directors in the Republic. Finally, whenever ports other than Batavia were included in the 
Europe-Asia trade, there was a direct exchange of letters between the directors and that 
particular establishment at that time.19) 
 The Governor-General and Council saw this  trade which circumvented Batavia as a 
threat to their own position. Moreover, they considered that such moves detracted from the 
efficacy of the role of Batavia as rendez-vous. Therefore the authorities in Batavia were well 
pleased when in 1636 the directors stopped the direct trade with Coromandel, Surat and 
Gamron, which had actually begun before the foundation of Batavia. In 1665, however, the 
Governor-General and councillors had to resign themselves to the fact that Ceylon was to 
function alongside Batavia as second port for homeward-bound shipping. The Heren XVII had 
given their assent to this trade in order to be able to supply the rapidly growing demand for 
pepper on the European market -the pepper from Malabar was imported via Ceylon. Moreover, 
this route had the added advantage that cinnamon from Ceylon was imported into Europe more 
quickly and, because it did not have to be transshipped, in better condition. 
 After Ceylon was granted a direct connection with home, fierce competition rapidly 
flared up between the governor of the island, Rijklof van Goens, and the Governor-General and 
Council. Van Goens believed that Ceylon, or more accurately the city of Galle, from where the 
homeward- bound VOC ships sailed, would serve as a better rendez-vous than Batavia for the 
Indian establishments of the Company. The result of his efforts was that the homeward-bound 
fleet from Ceylon was sometimes more richly laden than the ships from Batavia. On the basis 
of this the directors decided to extend this directe vaart to Coromandel and Bengal. This, 
however, did not prove a success, perhaps partly because Batavia did not support this policy 
and possibly even sabotaged it. Whatever the cause, little by little, the Governor-General and 
Council managed to win back lost ground and, by about 1700, apart from Batavia, only Galle 
had a direct link with patria. 
 The shifts in trade during the eighteenth century brought new changes in the shipping. 
During the first three decades, ships, known as coffee ships, sailed regularly from Mocca on the 
Red Sea via Galle back to the Netherlands. More importantly, after a caustic debate between 
the Heren XVII and the Governor-General and Council, in 1720 a direct link was established 
between The Netherlands and Canton. Up to 1733 the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland 
sent a total of thirteen ships to Canton, which failed to make Canton. After this, the 
organization of this trade was once again entrusted to Batavia on the understanding that of the 
two or three ships which then sailed annually from Batavia to China, only one would return to 
its homeport; the other ships with their cargos of tea and porcelain sailed back to the 
Netherlands via the Sunda Straits. Eventually, in 1756, when the Chinase commissie was 
inaugurated, the trade with China was once again managed from the Republic; the direct 
return fleet was continued. 
 The direct shipping link and the correspondence between patria and the establishments 
in India which this brought in its wake notwithstanding did not represent a fundamental 
infringement to the position of Batavia as the head office of the VOC in Asia. Batavia remained 
the centre for administration and book-keeping. Furthermore, the Governor-General and 
Council in Batavia continued to forward copies of correspondence with all its subordinate VOC 
establ
ishments to the directors at home, including the letters exchanged with Ceylon, Canton 
and Bengal. 
 The Governor-General and Council were a ssisted in their work by the generale 
secretarie (central administration). The secretary to the Governor-General and Council, who 
was in charge of the secretariat, attended the meetings of the Raad van Indië and drew up the 
resoluties (proceedings).20) Either the secretary himself, or the second man in the secretariat, 
an employee with the rank of koopman (merchant), entered up the Batavia dagregister (diary). 
The many clerks employed in the secretariat took care of the extensive paperwork entailed in 
the correspondence with the establishments in Asia and the chambers at home.  
 The directeur-generaal was re sponsible for trade and shipping throughout the whole of 
the Asian branch of the enterprise. Naturally he was expected to discuss such important 
matters as the compilation of the eis for goods and monies from patria in the council. In 
Batavia the warehouses, both for the merchandise and for provisions, the pay office and the 
ready money were under his supervision. He was assisted by two opperkooplieden van het 
Kasteel (chief merchants from the Castle). From 1664 the jobs were divided between these two 
officials in such a way that the first or senior of them administered the goods which were sent 
in by the Asian establishments, while the junior looked after the goods which were dispatched 
from Batavia. The extent of their task expanded in the course of time in which case the staff in 
the negotiekantoor (trade office), which they headed, was increased by a series of merchants, 
junior merchants and book-keepers. 
 The boekhouder-generaal (chief accountant)  was also subordinate to the director-
general. On the basis of the trading books from the establishments, the chief accountant made 
up both the generaal journaal (general journal) and the generaal grootboek (general ledger), 
copies of which were forwarded to the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland. Furthermore, the 
chief accountant administered the cargos which had been received from the Netherlands, as 
well as the retourgoederen which were sent back home. When the ships were unloaded in 
Batavia an inspection was held to check to what extent the goods received corresponded to the 
orginal demands or orders of the Governor-General and Council, with reference to the decision 
the Heren XVII had taken on these. When this had been done, the original order with a report 
on any excesses or omissions was sent back to the Netherlands, so that the directors could see 
where they or the chambers had been remiss.21) 
 Apart from this, from the work of the chief accountant can be deduced that in Asia, in 
contrast to patria, the accounting was centralized. The system employed did not link up with 
that of the chambers 22). The rationale behind this was very logical: as factor, the Asian 
branch of the business was responsible to the enterprise in the Republic for everything that it 
received from the chambers. The firm in the Republic was regarded as a unit, the current 
account refers to the Generale Oostindische Compagnie (General East India Company). In 
these current accounts everything which had been received from home in the way of goods and 
monies was noted in the credit column, and what was shipped back home in the way of return 
wares appears in the debit column. Expenses incurred in Asia were divided between five items: 
the general expenses, pay, expenses for ships, fortifications, and schenkagie (gifts). Under 
income, a distinction was made between income from trade and that derived from taxes and 
suchlike (called respectively generale winsten (general profit) and generale inkomsten (general 
income)). In the eighteenth century several items of costs and incomes were added to the 
books, but the system itself remained unchanged. The generale missiven also contain financial 
data about the Asian business. The making up of the general journals could sometimes be a 
lengthy process and therefore the book-keepers quickly gathered together the results from the 
various establishments and drew up the balances of income and expenditure per office. These 
could then be sent back with the return fleet in December or February as part of the generale 
missive. The 'real' financial books arrived as much as a year later. 
 The visitateur-generaal, who was also under  the director-general, had the task of 
inspecting the books and financial administration in Asia. He was also put in charge of checking 
the consumptie-rekeningen, in which, after thei
 r arrival from home, the captains had to 
account for the provisions used during the voyage. 
 The central role of Batavia in the Asian business is made obvious not only by the 
financial administration, but is also quite clearly indicated in the personnel administration as 
well. The pay office kept the number of staff throughout the whole of the Asian business up to 
date and for this purpose was annually supplied with the requisite information by the 
establishments. Every year after 1689 a complete list of the Company personnel in Asia was 
sent home in duplicate. 
 Batavia was also the seat of the highest law court in Asia, the Raad van Justitie. It was 
a rule that the president was also a member of the Raad van Indië@. Furthermore the seven 
members of this council were appointed by the Heren XVII , a fact that could not always 
prevent conflicts with the Governor-General and Council. The job of the fiscaals -there were 
two in Batavia- was to detect crime and the act as prosecutors. 
 In order to play a central role in the mariti me traffic Batavia was also provided with the 
requisite infrastructure such as shipyards, warehouses, a workmen's quarter and suchlike. No 
new ships were built in Batavia, but a lot of maintenance and repair work on the ships had to 
be carried out there, and the facilities needed for this were located on the island, Onrust, which 
lay just off the coast of Batavia. Work here and the ships in the roads were under the charge of 
the equipagemeester (master of the equipage). He was present when ships arrived and when 
they sailed; before they sailed he and one of the fiscaals called the muster-roll of that ship, 
after which he checked the cargo. 
 Naturally Batavia was also provided with admi nistrative bodies for the city itself. These 
administrative institutions appear to have been copied from those in cities in the Republic: 
there was a college van schepenen (board of aldermen), a board of governors of the 
orphanage, and of heemraden (drainage board). Public order was maintained by the baljuw 
(bailiff) and his men or kaffers . The Governor-General and Council exercised a great deal of 
influence in these organs; the presidents of these institutions were usually members of the 
Raad van Indië@. There was scarcely any citizenry independent of or free from the VOC and, in 
so far as there were any vrijburgers (free citizens), they had little say in the management of 
things. (See Appendix 8 for a diagram of the organization of the VOC in Asia.) 
 
 
8. THE END OF THE VOC 
 
The VOC endured a long drawn out death agony. As a consequence of the outbreak of the war 
with England in December 1780, the Company was engulfed by such colossal financial 
problems that the chambers in Holland had to request suspension of payment. Only the 
financial situation of the Zeeland Chamber did not yet require such a measure: this chamber 
did owe the Amsterdam Chamber a large sum of money, but had not borrowed a lot of money 
from third parties. The moratorium granted the chambers in Holland robbed the VOC of its 
credit in one fell swoop. The Company could not longer go ahead under its own steam. It was 
only thanks to the government, who guaranteed repayments and the payment of interest on 
any financial obligations that the VOC would undertake, that the directors were able to keep 
the Company afloat. 
 This dependence on the Government not only  led to the bolstering of the management 
by the Vijfde Department, but -in 1790- also gave rise to the setting up of the Hollands-
Zeeuwse Staatscommissie (Committee from the States of Holland and Zeeland). This 
committee of political supervision or politique insien consisted of four members from Holland 
and two from Zeeland, who were appointed by the States of their province. After the French 
occupation and the fall of the old Republic, the four members from Holland were replaced by 
Patriot regents. Later in the same year, another six Patriots were appointed to the committee. 
Placed under legal restraint, the days of the directors were numbered. In fact this committee 
proposed replacing the old board of directors by a Comité tot Zaken van de Oost-Indisch 
Handel en Bezittingen . This plan was adopted by the States General and on 1st March 1796 
the directors resigned their posts. 
 However, the charter of the VOC was simultaneously renewed, initially until the end of 
1798, later to 31st December 1800. Thus the VOC continued to exist. Nonetheless, the 
activities of the chambers were reduced to a minimum. Personnel were dismissed and 
workplaces were dismantled. In 1803 the chambers of Delft, Hoorn and Enkhuizen were 
abolished. Rotterdam and Middelburg were left with mere sales offices. In the meantime the 
fact that the charter had not been renewed meant that the Company no longer had a legal 
basis. In the absence of any new rules, the Comité and its successor, the Raad der Aziatische 
Bezittingen en Etablissementen (Council for the Asiatic Possessions and Establishments) 
(instituted on 15th May 1800), took the old order as its guideline. 
 In Asia the many changes undergone by the management of the Company had yet less 
effect. In 1793 one last attempt was made to halt the rot by sending out two commissioners, 
S.C. Nederburgh and F. Frijkenius. In 1795, after the outbreak of war, most of the VOC 
establishments fell into English hands. Java still remained under the Dutch and the Dutch flag 
still flew over the establishments in Canton and Deshima (Japan). The war had far- reaching 
consequences for trade and for shipping between Europe and Java; this could not longer 
continue on the old footing. Institutional changes in Batavia and in Java came later when H.W. 
Daendels, as Governor-General, thoroughly reorganized the administration. The great break 
with the past however came in 1811, when Java passed into English hands. 
 
 
Notes 
 
1. See, for example, the figures for the shipping of the Dutch East India Companies in J.R. 
Bruijn et al. eds., Dutch-Asiatic Shipping in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. 
Rijksgeschiedkundige publicatiën grote serie, 165-167 (3 volumes; Den Haag 1979 and 1987), 
especially Volumes II and III. 
 
2. For these figures see: Ibidem, Volume I (for shipping, trade and personnel) and J.P. de 
Korte, De jaarlijkse financiële verantwoording in de Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie. 
Werken uitgegeven door de vereeniging Het Nederlandsch Economisch-Historisch Archief 17 
(Leiden 1984) (for trade and finance). 
 
3. For the pre-companies: R. Bijlsma, 'De archieven van de compagnieën op Oost-Indie, 1594-
1603', Verslagen omtrent 's Rijks Oude Archieven 49 (1926) I, 173-224; Hans de Haan, 
Moedernegotie en grote vaart. Een studie over de expansie van het Hollandse handelskapitaal 
in de 16e en 17e eeuw (Amsterdam 1977) 79-99; F.S. Gaastra, De geschiedenis van de VOC 
(Zutphen 1992) 13-29. 
 
4. The original charter is in the archives of the VOC (inv. nr. 1). The charter of 1602 and the 
texts revised at the various renewals have been printed in various places, including C. Cau, 
Groot Placcaetboek I (Den Haag 1658) 530 et seq. and Pieter van Dam, Beschryvinge van de 
Oostindische Compagnie. F.W. Stapel and C.W.Th. van Boetzelaer eds. Rijksgeschiedkundige 
publicatiën, grote serie 63, 68, 74, 76, 83, 87, 96, (7 volumes; 's-Gravenhage 1927-1954) first 
book, part I, 43. 
 
5. J.G. van Dillen, Het oudste aandeelhoudersregister van de Kamer Amsterdam der Oost-
Indische Compagnie. Werken uitgegeven door de vereniging Het Nederlandsch Economisch-
Historisch Archief 14 ('s-Gravenhage 1958) 20-45, deals extensively with the problems that 
arose during the first ten years and the frustration of the capital investors. 
 
6. N. Steensgaard, 'The Dutch East India Company as an Institutional Innovation' in: M. 
Aymard ed., Dutch Capitalism and World Capitalism (Cambridge and Paris 1982) 235-257, 
especially 239-244. 
 
7. For the appointment, remuneration etc. of the directors: Van Dam, Beschryvinge first book, 
part I, 156-229. See also Femme Gaastra, Bewind en beleid bij de VOC. De financiële en 
commerciële politiek van de bewindhebbers, 1672-1702 (Zutphen 1989) 25-33. 
 
8. From 1648 onwards the directors of the Delft and Rotterdam chambers were only required 
to invest f. 3,000 to be shareholders in their Chamber. The functions which were open to the 
principal shareholders are clearly set out by F.W. Stapel in his edition of Van Dam, 
Beschryvinge first book, part I, 295 note 5. 
 
9. For the background to the appointment of William IV as director-general, see Isaac de Pinto, 
'Anecdotes historiques touchant le Stadhoudérat des Indes dans l'illustre maison d'Orange en 
1748 et 1749'. A.J. Veenedaal Jr. ed. in 
CHAPTER 2. ORIGIN AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE VOC ARCHIVES 
 
J.C.M. Pennings 
 
 
1. DURING THE EXISTENCE OF THE COMPANY (1602-1795) 
 
The activities in the chambers of the Company led to the production of a large quantity of 
paperwork. In view of the fact that the administration (and most of the other activities) was 
carried out independently by the six chambers, there was never a central archives 
depository and there was no uniform archives administration. Each chamber took care of its 
own papers. Furthermore, papers were yet again divided up among the different 
departments of the one chamber. The larger and more complex the organization of a 
chamber, the greater the number of places in the city where one could come across archival 
documents. For instance, the Amsterdam Chamber was divided into four departments, 
which themselves were comprised of several comptoiren (offices), each of which managed 
its own paperwork. The largest proportion of the documents was kept in the secretarie 
(administration), an office which was part of every chamber however small. 
 The archives of the various chambers do no t only contain documents pertaining to the 
administration of the Company in the Republic. All chambers could count upon a growing 
stream of paperwork from the octrooigebied (the area covered by the charter of the 
Company). Each year journals, letters, resoluties (proceedings), dagregisters (diaries), 
muster-rolls and other documents from the Governor-General and Council in Batavia and 
from the other establishments in Asia and the Cape of Good Hope arrived on the return 
ships. The Heren XVII (the board of directors) expected the Governor-General and Council 
to have all documents of importance for the directors copied and sent home in sixfold, one 
copy for each chamber. However, the copywork in the generale secretarie (central 
administration) in Batavia mounted up so much that it was impossible to oblige all the 
chambers at any one time. This was the cause of an incessant stream of complaints from 
the Heren XVII to the Governor-General and Council, but all in vain. In practice, only the 
Amsterdam and Zeeland Chambers could count on a regular supply.1) Nonetheless, the 
Governor-General and Council did make efforts to improve the situation. In 1725 the 
backlog in the clerical work in the generale secretarie in Batavia had reached such 
proportions that the Governor-General and Council proposed printing the resolutieboeken 
(records of proceedings) and the dagregisters. Only a few days later the plan was rejected 
because of the lack of type font. So things remained as they always had been and 
transcripts were made only for the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland.2) 
 The Company did indeed do its utmost to keep its administration carefully concealed 
from the outside world. VOC employees could indeed use them for reference; and directors 
often had copies made for their own use, which are now found in their private archives. For 
outsiders the VOC observed stringent secrecy about its activities and its internal 
administration. In this the VOC was stricter than the West India Company. For example, a 
work like that of the VOC advocate, Pieter van Dam, the Beschryvinge van de Oostindische 
Compagnie (Description of the East Indian Company) (1701), which was based entirely on 
original documents, was intended for internal use only. It was only published in the 
twentieth century. In contrast, Joannes de Laet, the author of the Jaerlijck Verhael van de 
West Indische Compagnie (Annual Report of the West India Company), could have his work 
published in 1644. 
 
The Amsterdam Chamber 
Among the si
x chambers of the VOC, without any doubt that of Amsterdam possessed the 
largest archives. The main reason for this was the extent of the business of the Amsterdam 
Company. In fact, in accordance with the stipulations of the charter, the Amsterdam 
Chamber assumed the responsibility for half of all the work. Besides this, the size of the 
archives was also affected by the administrative machinery of the Company. The Heren XVII 
did not have their own administrative apparatus, but made use of the administration of the 
chamber which held the presidency. For three-quarters of the time this was Amsterdam, 
and for the remaining quarter Zeeland. Furthermore, the Company advocate was employed 
not only by the Heren XVII but also by the Amsterdam Chamber. He was domiciled in 
Amsterdam. In practice this meant that most of the records of the Heren XVII were to be 
found in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber. For instance, letters addressed to the 
Heren XVII were bound into the same volume as those to the directors of the Amsterdam 
Chamber. For several years they also kept a common letter-book for outgoing documents. 
 The archives of the Amsterdam Chamber were  formed and stored at various locations 
within the city. The most important of these sites was the schrijf- of klerkenkantoor (clerical 
administrative office) in the Oostindisch Huis in the Oude Hoogstraat. The oldest known 
instruction for the clerks of the schrijfkantoor dates from 1663.3) This mentions a chief 
clerk, under whose authority thirteen other clerks worked. In a regulation dating from 1703, 
two chief clerks are mentioned.4) All the papers and documents presented by the directors 
or the Company advocate were copied in the schrijfkantoor. The clerks worked in turns 
under the supervision of the directors of the departement van de rekenkamer (department 
of the audit office) or of one of the advocates.  
 Among the routine activities in the schrijfkantoor, as these are described in the few 
extant eighteenth-century notes, were keeping up to date all the letter-books of outgoing 
documents from the Amsterdam Chamber to the other chambers, the resolutieboeken of 
the chamber, the duplicate resolutieboeken of the Heren XVII, the indexes on the resoluties 
and the outgoing letters of the Heren XVII, and the indexes on the resoluties of the 
chamber. This is only a random selection. The clerks were kept exceedingly busy in March 
and September when the Heren XVII held their sessions, and in June or July when the 
Haags Besogne (preparatory session of the Heren XVII held in August) met. Before this 
latter body assembled it was the responsibility of the clerks to see that the directors of all 
the chambers were supplied with the relevant documents and, after the session had closed, 
that documents such as the reports of the Haags Besogne and the letter-books of outgoing 
letters to the Governor-General and Council were sent to the chambers.5) 
 As a result of all these activities the si ze of the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber 
increased rapidly, all the more so because every year another not insubstantial number of 
records arrived from the octrooigebied with the return ships. Above all it was the swelling 
number of what are called the overgekomen brieven en papieren (letters and papers 
received from Asia) which gave the directors of the Amsterdam Chamber a lot of food for 
thought as time went by. In 1695 they decided to set up a charterkamer (records room), in 
vi
ew of the fact that '... the books and papers, from time to time, received from Asia, have 
grown to such quantities, the which will only but increase in the years to come ...'.6) 
 These were the years in which Pieter van Da m also girded up his loins for work. In 1693 
he was commanded by the Heren XVII to write a description of the VOC based on the 
records. It is not certain if the work of Pieter van Dam played a role in the appointment of 
the first librarian of the charterkamer in 1699. In view of the dates one could assume that 
this was indeed the case. 
 This librarian, whose name was Pieter van Ri jn, was given the task of looking after and 
making an inventory of the Company's charters and papers.7) For this he was paid an 
annual salary of 200 guilders. Pieter van Rijn had worked for the Amsterdam Chamber as a 
book-keeper in the liquidatiekantoor (clearing office) since 1680. He continued to fulfil this 
function after his appointment as librarian in 1699. The same applied to his successors: for 
all of them the office of librarian was a subsidiary position. Pieter van Rijn died in 1726. 
Only in 1742 was his successor, Dirk ten Brink, who had been employed as permanent clerk 
to the first advocate of the Company, appointed.8) He, in his turn, was succeeded in 1759 
by Cornelis Heyligendorp, who like Ten Brink occupied the position of permanent clerk to 
the first advocate.9) In 1778 Heyligendorp was appointed supercargo and opperhoofd (head 
of the establishment) in China. After his departure the chaos in the charterkamer rapidly 
mounted. This was a thorn in the flesh for the directors of the rekenkamer, who considered 
the proper organization of the books and papers very important. In the meeting of the 
directors of the Amsterdam Chamber held on 20th October 1779, they proposed that the 
Company advocate, Meerman van der Goes, be appointed librarian.10) The meeting 
supported this motion. Nonetheless, complaints about the state of the charters and papers 
continued. In the opinion of the directors of the Vijfde Departement (Fifth Department), set 
up in 1786 and given provisional houseroom in the charterkamer, the documents were 
treated with the utmost nonchalance. It was quite common for documents not to be 
replaced after use and then could not be found again.11) 
 Besides the clerks in the schrijfkantoor of the Oostindische Huis, other VOC functionaries 
received and wrote documents. For instance, the chief accountant of the Amsterdam 
Chamber, with the assistance of clerks, made up the accounts and drew up the balance 
sheets and, amongst other tasks, he kept the journals, daybooks, ledgers and share 
registers up to date. In the pay office the Amsterdam chamber employed book-keepers, 
who recorded the ship's pay-ledgers. When they took office the book-keepers were 
moreover required to swear a special oath; they swore that they would not let anybody see 
their books and papers, unless the latter had received permission to be able to do so from 
the directors. However, at their own express request, the book-keepers were allowed to 
supply permitted abstracts from papers, provided that these were not injurious to the VOC 
12). The compilation of the muster-rolls was the task of a clerk in the equipage department 
13). Finally there were book-keepers and clerks employed in the warehouse and the 
shipyard. 
 The archives which thus evolved were not kept entirely in the charterkamer in the Oude 
Hoogstraat. Probably there were also papers from the Amsterdam Chamber in the 
Zeemagazijn (ships' store) or Oostindisch Buitenhuis on Oostenburg. Most of the shipyards, 
warehouses and other buildings of the VOC were situated in the vicinity of this large 
storehouse.14) 
 The mapmaker occupied a special position in the business. He provided not only the 
ships of the Amsterdam Chamber with maps and navigational instruments, but those of the 
other chambers as well. Only the Zeeland Chamber occasionally commissioned its own 
maps. The maps were compiled on the basis of the ships' logs which were brought back on 
the return ships. Upon the arrival of these ships it was the right of the mapmaker to claim 
these logs. Logs and maps were kept in a special room in the Oostindisch Huis, where they 
were regularly inventoried by the mapmaker.15) 
 
Zeeland Chamber 
In comparison to the Amsterdam archives, the situation of the archives in the Zeeland 
Chamber was much better. For instance, Zeeland had a charterkamer committee, who 
supervised the administration of the archives by the chartermeester (archivist). The first 
reference to a chartermeester dates from 1737. This was the year in which an instruction 
was compiled for the chartermeester Thomas Cunnegam (or Cunningham) 't Hooft.16) This 
included the stipulation that the books and papers from the charterkamer could only be lent 
to directors and functionaries in return for a receipt. The directors of the Vijfde Departement 
in Amsterdam were cognizant of this regulation. In 1786 they suggested adopting the 
Zeeland system in Amsterdam; probably this never got beyond the proposal. 
 Another stipulation in the instruction of the chartermeester stated that all chests 
containing letters and papers, which were brought from Asia by the return ships, had to be 
opened by the chartermeester and thei
 r contents had to be recorded. After this had been 
done, the papers which were required for daily use had to be deposited in the records 
cupboards in the directors' boardroom. On the basis of these documents the chartermeester 
kept the 'general register of all the Company's books which were sent home from Asia' up 
to date. This register is the oldest inventory of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber which 
has survived. The documents described in it cover the period 1612 to 1794 and are 
classified alphabetically according to the type of document e.g. acteboeken (registers of title 
deeds), brieven en papieren ontvangen uit Indië (letters and papers received from Asia), 
cassaboeken (cashbooks) and so forth.17) 
 
Chambers of Delft, Rotterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen 
Much less is known about the care of the archives in the chambers of Delft, Rotterdam, 
Hoorn and Enkhuizen. On average the smaller chambers had no more than twenty 
employees.18) In some cases the administration of the archives was the task of one of 
these officials, for instance the book-keeper, but it was not unknown for the directors 
themselves to lend a hand with them. This is what happened in Enkhuizen. In 1800, the 
deputy-secretary of the former Enkhuizen Chamber, Mr. Rant, wrote to the Raad der 
Aziatische Bezittingen en Etablissementen (Council for Asian Possessions and 
Establishments), amongst other information, that '... directors at times, had taken charge of 
the work of the books and charters, themselves, and without employing anyone else 
therefore...'. In his opinion this was the reason that the archives room in Enkhuizen was in 
a state of utter chaos and there were no lists of VOC archivalia.19) Such lists of the defunct 
Company's archives were, however, present in the former chambers of Delft and Hoorn.20) 
The register of the Delft Chamber, compiled by the clerk David Vallensis, is very extensive 
and gives some idea of how large the archives must have been during the era of the 
Company. The archives were stored in three different locations in Delft: in the 
charterkamer, in the office of the chief accountant, and in the pay office.21) Unfortunately 
all that we know about the archives of the Rotterdam Chamber is that the Oostindisch Huis 
in the Boompjes had a charterkamer.22) Although there is no record of this, it is plausible 
that there were also archival documents to be found in The Hague, in the premises where 
the Haags Besogne met. 
 
 
2. BATAVIAN - FRENCH PERIOD (1796-1813) 
 
Intensive interest in the VOC archives 
In 1795 the VOC was given a new direction. Along with its debts and its archives, the 
possessions of the Company passed into the hands of the state. On the orders of the States 
General, all the papers of the VOC present in Amsterdam were handed over on 30th 
January 1796 to the Comité tot de Zaken van de Oost-Indische Handel en Bezittingen 
(Committee for Affairs relating to the East Indian Trade and Possessions), which was 
shortened to Oostindische Comité. 
 The Oostindische Comité took its responsibility for the care of the VOC archives very 
seriously. Through the intervention of B.F. van Liebeherr, one of the committee members, 
the 'secret' papers were speedily transferred from the former VOC premises in The Hague to 
Amsterdam.23) At the suggestion of the well known Patriot S.I. Wiselius in 1796 an 
investigation into the books and papers of the VOC was set in motion and a chartermeester 
was appointed.24) His instructions made it clear that he was not only to take charge of the 
archives, but also to write a historical account of the Company. This assignment was 
entrusted to a former book-keeper from the factory in North Java, Jan La Pro. The fact that 
in those days people were mainly interested in the political and military history of the VOC 
is revealed by the documents which La Pro considered to be important for his work and 
which he had placed in the Oostindisch Huis: the reports of the Haags Besogne, the 
resoluties of the Heren XVII, of the Amsterdam Chamber and of the Governor-General and 
Council, the outgoing letters from the Heren XVII to Asia, and so forth. Duplicates of these 
were transferred to the Buitenhuis on Oostenburg in Amsterdam, where the series referring 
to financial and economic affairs were also moved. These documents were described as '... 
a party of superfluous and mostly useless books and papers from the last century ...'.25) 
 
Centralization of the administration and archives 
In 1800 the Oostindisch Comité was superseded by the Raad der Aziatische Bezittingen en 
Etablissementen (Council for Asian Possessions and Establishments), or the Aziatische Raad. 
The goal of the Raad was to concentrate its administration in Amsterdam as far as possible. 
From this time onwards the chambers outside Amsterdam were known as buitencomptoiren 
(external offices). In 1802 the buitencomptoiren in Hoorn, Enkhuizen and Delft were 
liquidated; only outstanding business -mostly salary claims- were still dealt with. The offices 
in Rotterdam and Middelburg continued to function. 
 As far as the archives of the former VOC were concerned, the policy of the Aziatische 
Raad was aimed at transferring as many papers as possible to the generale charterkamer 
(general records room) in the Oostindisch Binnenhuis in Amsterdam. This applied to the 
papers that were still kept in other locations in Amsterdam and at the buitencomptoiren. 
The secretaries or chief accountants of the buitencomptoiren were requested to forward 
registers of the VOC archives in their possession to the chartermeester of the Aziatische 
Raad within three months.26) None of the buitencomptoiren offered the slightest resistance 
to this measure. Some did, however, object to such short notice. In due course the offices 
in Enkhuizen, Delft and Rotterdam submitted lists of their VOC archives 27). Only the 
inventory from Delft is still extant 28). 
 Nowhere is there any evidence  that on this occasion archival records were actually 
handed over. This only took place in 1804, when the Aziatische Raad instructed the 
buitencomptoiren to send their pay ledgers before 1st November to Amsterdam, where a 
central pay office was to be established.29) The first to respond was J.C. de Blocquery, 
former chief accountant with the VOC, who was responsible for the business still 
outstanding in the defunct chambers of Hoorn and Enkhuizen. Besides forwarding 101 
chests of pay ledgers, he also sent the so-called liquidatieboeken (settlement books) and 
the actie- en afgifte boeken (registers of shares and drafts) to Amsterdam.30) A good year 
later, around about the end of 1805, the Delft office sent muster-rolls and soldijkohieren 
(pay-ledgers) to Amsterdam.31) 
 Part of the Delft archives had been sent to Rotterdam in 1803. The remainder followed a 
few years later, when the Oostindisch Binnenhuis in Delft was handed over to the army 
medical service in 1807. This meant that a solution had to be found for the considerable 
amount of books and papers there on the spot. The Ministerie van Koophandel en Koloniën 
(Ministry for Commerce and Colonies) ordered chief accountant Smits of the Rotterdam 
office to transfer the charters and papers which had been deposited in the Oostindisch 
Binnenhuis in Delft to Rotterdam. As an alternative, Smits himself proposed that, should the 
new owners in Delft not want to use the charterkamer, simply to close this up so that the 
cost of transportation could be saved. The Aziatische Raad did not adopt his suggestion.32) 
 In the Delft inventory already mentione d, which had been compiled by the clerk 
Vallensis, there is an exact record of which documents arrived in Rotterdam on 3rd March 
1807. This would appear to have been the bulk of the archives of the Delft Chamber. In 
Rotterdam the documents were stored at three places: in what was known as the Delftse 
kamer (Delft C
 hamber), in the great charterkamer and in the mace loft. 
 The former Hoorn Chamber cont inued to occupy its old building until 1809. In this year it 
had to make way for the Raad en Rentmeester Generaal van de Domeinen in Noord-Holland 
(Council and Rentmaster General for the Domains in North Holland). On this occasion De 
Blocquery handed over some of the books and papers of the former Hoorn Chamber to the 
Aziatische Raad, to wit those pertaining to the commercial department.33) 
 In Amsterdam the documents from Hoorn an d Enkhuizen were placed in the warehouse 
Batavia (on the Rapenburg). At this juncture in time the remaining VOC documents were to 
be found in the charterkamer of the Oostindisch Binnenhuis, in the Oostindisch Buitenhuis 
and in the storehouse the Oude Werf.34) No trace of any system can be discovered in the 
division of the VOC archives then adopted. For instance, the net-resoluties (fair copies of 
the proceedings) of the Heren XVII were in the charterkamer, while the minuut-resoluties 
(draft minutes of the proceedings) were put in the storehouse the Oude Werf and the kopie-
resoluties (duplicates of proceedings) were deposited in the warehouse Batavia. 
 
 
Opposition from Zeeland 
The fate of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber is a story in itself. In 1800 the office in 
Middelburg was also asked to submit registers of any VOC archives in its possession and 
later on, in 1804, to hand over the pay ledgers. The office did not comply with either 
request. However, in 1804 a number of the registers, charters and papieren tot de 
negotiatiën (commercial papers) asked for by the Aziatische Raad were handed over.35) In 
the same year and in the years that followed the Middelburg office stoutly resisted any 
infringement of its competence to the advantage of Amsterdam. Whatever the cost, it 
wanted to hold onto its share in the East Indian trade and endeavoured to maintain the 
autonomous position it had occupied during the Company era. Eventually even Middelburg 
had to bow before the wish to concentrate commercial activities in Amsterdam. Therefore in 
1808 the former offices of the VOC in Middelburg were united into one office, with 
Commissioner-Director N.C. Lambrechtsen at its head. It was he who proposed selling the 
so-called useless papers of the former East India and West India Companies. He was 
obliged to do so because the charters and papers had to be moved from the Westindisch to 
the Oostindisch Huis, which meant that space would be a problem. Lambrechtsen obtained 
permission for the ministry for his plan, but it is not certain if matters ever progressed as 
far as an actual sale.36) 
 Despite repeated insistence from Amsterdam,  Middelburg remained firm in its refusal to 
hand over the former VOC archives. It was only in 1851 that Middelburg finally succumbed. 
The official P. Pous played a decisive role in this tug-of-war. He had been appointed to the 
position of deputy-secretary by the Oostindisch Comité in 1797. For more than half a 
century the Company's papers remained in his care. He guarded them as if they had been 
his own children. An example of the dedication shown by Pous is the action he took in 1809 
to prevent the papers falling into the hands of the English. 
 The story began in 1809 when the English occu pied the island of Walcheren, at which 
time a sequestration order was placed on the Oostindisch Huis and the papers contained in 
it. The commissioner-director, Lambrechtsen, was approached by two English prize 
commissioners with the question '...if I would be inclined to purchase from them all the 
books, charters and papers which are to be found in the Oostindisch Huis, under the 
supposition the English government deemed the same useless for the service of the English 
East India Company and therefore they had another use for the house than had so far been 
the case...'.37) The Ministerie van Marine en Koloniën (Ministry for the Navy and Colonies) 
ordered him to reply to the English stating that they, for their part, were not in the least 
interested. In view of the fact that there were duplicates of almost all the Middelburg 
archival records in Amsterdam, there was absolutely no reason to enrich the enemy, was 
the opinion of the Ministry.38) It proposed that, when the archives were sold as waste 
paper by the English, Lambrechtsen should even at that late stage select the most 
important documents among them and buy them back. However, this never came to pass. 
Pous, according to his own account, was able to persuade the English prize-master, General 
Sontny, who was billeted with Pous' brother-in-law, to leave behind the books and papers 
from the VOC archives in the charterkamer. The English only took documents relating to 
Ceylon 39). The bulk of the archives was saved for Middelburg, despite the fact that the 
English made a huge mess of the great charterkamer. According to Lambrechtsen, the 
charterkamer '... before the arrival of the English had been a show-pi
 ece of neatness and 
order; a monument to ancestral industry and diligence and to the broad extent of the 
business and possessions of the former East India Company'.40) It is possible that the loss 
of a great part of the seventeenth century archives can be laid at the door of the English 
interference.41) 
 The English withdrew in December of the year 1809; in May 1810 the French arrived. No 
lesser a person than Pous himself escorted the Emperor Napoleon around the island of 
Walcheren, and he took the opportunity to show him the Oostindisch Huis: '... he then also 
came to the charterkamer, which spacious and clean room he immediately wanted not 
because of the books to be found there, but in order to make it into a hospital ward ...'. 
Pous advised him against doing so because the charterkamer was located on the third floor 
and, moreover, was cold in winter. It seemed that danger was averted until January 1814, 
when six thousand French troops retreated to Walcheren and wanted to sell the archives as 
waste paper to allay their financial straights. According to Pous, the French did indeed 
destroy and sell a great deal of them.42) 
 
The establishment of a central archives depot in Paris 
Not only the Zeeland archives, but also those in Amsterdam suffered at the hands of the 
French. It was Napoleon's wish to institute a central depository for all the archives from the 
countries he had occupied. This so-called iron palace was to be built in Paris in the Champ 
de Mars. 
 In June 1811, the first, and what would la ter prove to be the only, consignment of 
colonial archival records from Amsterdam arrived in Paris 43). The French were mainly 
interested in documents which could be of use for the current service. In the twenty-one 
chests which were packed for transportation, there were very few VOC documents. Only the 
Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie by Pieter van Dam, a number of treaties with 
Asian rulers and memories van overgave (final reports) were included in the consignment. 
However, these documents were never actually sent. Only thirteen chests and one iron box 
ever arrived in Paris 44). The commissioner of the Departement van Koophandel en 
Koloniën (Departement for Commerce and Colonies), H. Vollenhoven, stated this in 1815. 
According to him, in total some forty volumes, which did not include the VOC works 
mentioned, were sent to Paris.45) 
 A second operation was planned in 1812. This time a great many more documents were 
involved. The French national archives sent one of its officials, called Tourlet, to the 
Netherlands. His commission was to select the most interesting documents from the Dutch 
archives and to send these to Paris. He was informed about the colonial archives by 
Vollenhoven, who was then Chef der Divisie tot de Liquidatie der Zaken van de Koloniën 
(Head of the Department for the Settlement of Colonial Affairs). On 2nd June 1812 Tourlet 
took leave of Vollenhoven, having first signed a declaration about which archival documents 
from the former Ministerie van Marine en Koloniën had to be transferred to Paris. In total 
these comprised 3955 volumes about the East. These documents never went any further 
than the archives depository on the Turfgracht near the Jewish synagogue in Amsterdam. 
The transportation to Paris was a non-event.46) 
 In 1813 the Netherlands regained its independ ence. King William I decided to put Colonel 
M.J. de Man, the former deputy-director of the Depot-Generaal van Oorlog (General Depot 
of War), in charge of the retrieval of the Dutch archives in Paris. De Man made sure that, in 
the winter of 1815/1816, two chests containing archival documents from the Departement 
van Koophandel en Koloniën were returned to the Netherlands. As was said earlier, these 
chests, with the exception of a few maps, contained little or no VOC documents.47) 
 
 
3. THE ERA OF THE MINISTRY OF COLONIES (1813-1856) 
 
Removals and large-scale destructions 
In the summer of 1816, on the orders of the director-general of the Departement van 
Koophandel en Koloniën, J. Goldberg, the documents brought back from Paris along with 
other charters, books and papers pertaining to the department, were transferred to the 
charterkamer in the Binnenhof in The Hague. In 1815 the depository in Amsterdam handed 
over to the department eighteen chests containing archives, including resoluties of the 
Heren XVII and the Amsterdam Chamber. These documents were also stored in the 
charterkamer in the Binnenhof. An inventory was compiled of the documents to be found 
there, whi
ch shows that these were mainly documents from the last period of the 
eighteenth century.48) A few decades later it seemed that a large proportion of the 
documents had been returned to Amsterdam. It is not clear when exactly they were brought 
back. 
 In Amsterdam the VOC archives were kept at various locations. One of these places was 
still the Oostindisch Binnenhuis, where the books and papers from the pay office were 
housed. A considerable portion of the archives stored there was sold to the highest bidder 
by the ministry in the winter of 1821/1822. This was the fate which befell some 9,500 to 
10,000 volumes, mainly dating from the seventeenth century.49) 
 In 1832 the Ministerie van Koloniën (Ministry of Colonies) was asked to vacate the 
Oostindisch Binnenhuis, as the building had been designated as premises for the 
administration of direct taxation and excise. Plans were made to house all the VOC papers 
in the Westindisch Slachthuis. This former warehouse of the West India Company was 
situated on the IJkant in Amsterdam. VOC archival records were already stored here. In 
view of the fact that the papers in the Westindisch Slachthuis were in a state of great 
disorder, the minister first had an inventory compiled by the clerk P.L. de Munnick before 
giving the signal for the removal of the remaining VOC archives from the Oostindisch 
Binnenhuis. From this inventory it seems that the papers were located in the first and 
second records lofts of the Westindisch Slachthuis.50) 
  From the very beginning it was obvious that the Westindisch Slachthuis could not 
contain the huge VOC archives. In 1830 an investigation was set in train by the 
commissioner for the colonies, J. van der Velden, to find out which books and papers could 
be destroyed or sold without any objections. De Munnick, who in the meantime had been 
promoted to head of the magazine, continued this investigation in 1832. Both reached the 
same conclusion that two-thirds of the pay-ledgers could be missed without raising any 
problems. At first the plan was to clear out of the way only those books and papers dating 
from before 1750, but because this yielded so little, the landboeken from post-1750 had to 
follow suit.51) Finally it was laid down in a Royal Decree of 8th June 1832 that the following 
documents had to be sold by public subscription: those registers which were known in the 
pay office of the VOC under the designations landboeken and thuisreisboeken (see below), 
the letter files containing the documents paid up to the year 1750, minuut-notulen (draft 
minutes) and financial documents including amongst other material ledgers, bankbooks and 
commercial registers. The number of volumes to be disposed of amounted to 5136, the 
number of letter files to 1851. In total 3160 volumes and 587 letter files from the pay office 
were to be preserved.52) 
 Thus what remained of the extensive holdings were the muster-rolls and ship's pay-
ledgers, which were also known as uitreisboeken. Nothing has survived of the so-called 
landboeken and thuisreisboeken. It is therefore difficult to determine what these books 
contained.53) Even in earlier years these landboeken and thuisreisboeken must have fallen 
prey to tidying up frenzies of the Ministerie van Koloniën. Before the spring clean of the 
year 1832 there were only a few such documents dating from before 1750 still extant in the 
pay office in Amsterdam. It is probable that these documents were among the great mass 
of VOC paper which was sold in the winter of 1821/1822. 
 The criteria which were observed in this cl earance were for the most part pragmatic. In 
principle one preserved what was still important for outstanding business, for example the 
salary administration which was needed for the settlement of salary claims. Among the 
remaining documents which were destroyed were the whole of the secret archives of the 
Heren XVII and the Amsterdam Chamber and the large bulk of the documents referring to 
the admi
nistration of the Company in the Republic. 
 
The transference of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber to Amsterdam in 1851 
The bulk of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber was saved from destruction thanks to the 
stubborn refusal of the Zeelanders, Pous in particular, to hand the archives over to 
Amsterdam.54) Finally in 1851 Pous was simply forced to surrender his archives. After half 
a century of pleading people in Amsterdam realized that '... Mr Pous, an extremely elderly 
man, would be reluctant to part with the papers which he seems to have had in his care 
since the liquidation of the Company ...'.55) 
 Throughout the years, whenever Amsterdam intimated that it would like to receive the 
Middelburg archives, Pous had continually produced impediments to the transference. For 
instance, in 1830, Pous wrote that he was too preoccupied to send the papers at a time '... 
in which I even on our island can yet see the flag of rebellion and ingratitude flying on the 
other side ...'. In this he was referring to the feelings of the man in the street: 'For to load 
up everything en masse, I at least would be most reluctant to lend my hand to this in these 
times; the common man, and this class it is, who here as elsewhere can cause the most 
disturbance, is still much too much attached to the ancient name of the East India 
Company, not to observe with sorrow that people were taking away the Company's books 
and papers, for which, as it were, a sacred respect is nurtured ...'.56) In 1851 he made one 
final attempt to obstruct a complete removal. On this occasion he suggested finding out 
which documents were available both in Middelburg and Amsterdam, and then to send 
thither only those Zeeland documents which were not available in duplicate form in 
Amsterdam.57) Amsterdam, however, wanted the complete archives and got them. In 
September 1851 a total of 6250 kilos of archives from Middelburg arrived in the Westindisch 
Slachthuis.58) 
 
Beginning of the historical interest in the VOC archives 
In those days the general public was completely ignorant of the content and probably even 
of the existence of the VOC archives. This is not surprising as the old habit of secrecy which 
insisted that the archives were only there for internal information was still maintained in the 
department. Visitors were hardly ever permitted into the depositories. This was in contrast 
to the practice in the State Archives, where there had been limited access to government 
documents since 1829. However, in those days historical interest for the VOC archives was 
not very great. 
 This changed in the 1840s, when  academic interest in Dutch-Asian relations disseminated 
back from the Indies. People began to discover the historical value of the VOC archives and 
asked permission from the department to be able to conduct research in the archives. The 
huge clearances in the Company's archives and the way in which the documents were 
looked after became general knowledge at this time and caused a storm of public 
indignation.59) The American historian J. Romeyn Brodhead, who visited the Westindisch 
Slachthuis in 1841, wrote this about it: 'In applying in Amsterdam at West India House, I 
was to my infinite surprise and mortification informed by Mr. de Munnick, the keeper, that 
all the books, documents and papers of every kind belonging to the Old East and West India 
Comp. of a date prior to 1700 had been sold at public auction in 1821 by order of the 
Government of the Netherlands'.60) 
 The famous antiquarian Frederik Muller, a regular visitor to the Westindisch Slachthuis, 
was also incensed by the way in which the VOC archives were being kept. During one of his 
visits he came across the first shareholders' register of the VOC in a most unlikely place: 
'This book was being used as a doorstop in order to prop closed a door that was otherwise 
constantly opening!'61) In 1853 J.J.F. Noordziek wrote a survey of archives in the 
Netherlands. The picture he paints of the condition of the VOC archives is not very rosy. 
'From the point of view of light, cleanliness, dryness and security [the lofts of the 
Westindisch Slachthuis] leave a lot to be desired'. The best rooms in the building were let to 
the Nederlandse Handelmaatschappij (Dutch Trading Company) to store bales of grocery 
articles from the colonies. The documents comprising the archives were spread over four 
lofts, in the best of which the archives of the Zeeland Chamber had found a home.62) 
 The fact that Noordziek was even able to comp ile a survey of the contents of the colonial 
archives was entirely due to one man, the lawyer L.C.D. van Dijk. He was the first Dutch 
academic to choose a topic from Dutch colonial history for his thesis and for this he 
conducted research into original source material 63). During his research he ran into a lot of 
resistance on the part of the department. However, Van Dijk was not to be deterred. 
Absolutely fascinated by the material he discovered in the archives lofts in Amsterdam, he 
even offered his services to the department free of charge to put the sources in order. In 
1852 the Minister of Colonies appointed him scientific archivist, specially concerned with the 
arrangement and ordering of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber which had been 
transferred from Middelburg. Investigations of an administrative nature continued to be the 
responsibility of the agent of the Departement van Koloniën (Department of Colonies), De 
Munnick.64) Nonetheless, this new development did not mean that visitors to the 
Westindisch Slachthuis were helped in any more satisfactory manner. According to Frederik 
Muller supervision was improved but one had now jumped from the frying pan into the fire: 
'Two officials of high birth were appointed one after the other, who mistrusted the many 
visitors in the most demeaning manner and made all research difficult.'65) 
 
 
4. THE VOC ARCHIVES AND THE GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
Transferences 
This situation was not to last long. Despite opposition from the Minister van Koloniën 
(Minister of Colonies), Ch.F. Pahud, the VOC archives were handed over to the State 
Archives in The Hague in 1856. It was high time. In the preceding years, as the result of the 
public airing of Indies affairs in the Tweede Kamer, the public had become alerted to the 
existence of the old colonial archives and people began to take an interest in them. The 
Batavian clergyman W.R. van Hoëvell, founder of the historically slanted Tijdschrift voor 
Nederlandsch-Indië, played an important role in this. In conjunction with the recently 
appointed State Archivist, R.C. Bakhuizen van den Brink, he pleaded for accessibility to the 
VOC archives. They were both firmly convinced that public access would be best guaranteed 
in the new premises of the State Archives at the Plein in The Hague. In Bakhuizen's view, 
the accessibility to the colonial documents in the ministry was completely unsatisfactory. 
For himself personally the transfer of the Company's archives to the State Archives was a 
sort of test case for the public accessibility of archives. His new archives bill, which was yet 
to be drafted, would also regulate the handing over of archives still in the hands of 
departments.66) Here it should be noted that the first archives bill was only passed in 1918, 
long after Bakhuizen van den Brink's term of office as State Archivist. 
 Some documents were excepted from the transfer of the VOC papers to the State 
Archives in 1856. A number of so-called doubles, including the resoluties of the Heren XVII 
from the Zeeland Chamber, were loaned to the Municipal Archives of Amsterdam.67) 
Furthermore, at the request of De Munnick, the pay-ledgers remained at the Departement 
van Koloniën in Amsterdam, in view of the fact that these were still regularly needed for 
dealing with claims of descendents of VOC employees. Bakhuizen van den Brink agreed 
wholeheartedly to this. In his opinion archives should only be preserved if they were of 
scientific interest. He even suggested the long term destruction of pay-ledgers and similar 
documents, which in his eyes were completely useless for either historical science or for the 
interests of the state.68) However, the minister of internal affairs, under whose jurisdiction 
the State Archives fell, had completely different ideas. On his orders, the pay ledgers then 
still extant - some had been destroyed in the intervening years 69) - were handed over to 
the State Archives in 1884. In total this involved some 4037 volumes, including 3000 ship's 
pay ledgers.70) 
 Not much had survived of the archives of the smaller chambers. In the old archives of 
the municipality of Rotterdam and the old archives of the municipality of Hoorn it transpired 
that there were still a number of documents from the chambers of Rotterdam, Hoorn and 
Enkhuizen respectively. In 1901 these documents were handed over to the State 
Archives.71) 
 
Administration of the VOC archives 
Throughout the years many archivists have occupied themselves at the General State 
Archives with the description and arrangement of the VOC archives. After the transfer in 
1856, J.K.J. de Jonge was the first person to take charge of the administration of the VOC 
archives in the General State Archives. He created a great deal of work for his successors by 
taking apart the volumes containing the overgekomen brieven en papieren of the Heren 
XVII and the Amsterdam Chamber up to the year 1690. It was only in this year that it 
became the rule to make tables of contents of the overgekomen brieven en papieren. In 
order to facilitate consultation of the pre-1690 documents, De Jonge pulled apart all 
volumes up to 1659 and the volumes from the Westerkwartieren (Western Quarter) from 
1660 to 1690. Having done so he then rearranged the documents according to factory, 
which meant that the origin of and connection between the documents was not longer 
readily distinguishable. Around the turn of the century his efforts were rectified by J.E. 
Heeres and H.T. Colenbrander.72) 
 The first inventory was compiled in the seventies of last century by the retired naval 
officer P.A. Leupe. This may not really be called an inventory. It was more a catalogue of 
documents, not only from the VOC but from other East Indian archives as well. The papers 
were arbitrarily arranged according to subject. Thus, from the records of the Amsterdam 
Chamber and the States General, Leupe compiled a collection of journals consisting of 
descriptions of voyages of discovery, ship's logs, instructions and so forth.73) In some 
cases he also disturbed the original unity of the volumes by tearing out items and then 
arranging these according to subject. Later Heeres returned these documents to their 
original place and restored the original order.74) However, the same was not done with the 
maps and drawings, which Leupe excised from the overgekomen brieven en papieren. 
Today these still remain in the collection of foreign maps which Leupe put together at that 
time in the maps and drawings section of the General State Archives. 
 After Leupe, Heeres and P.A.N.S. van Meurs worked simultaneously on the VOC archives. 
Van Meurs was engaged with describing the personnel administration of the Company. He 
compiled a survey of the series of ship's pay-ledgers, which had swelled considerably in 
1884 when the papers from the depository of the Ministerie van Koloniën in Amsterdam 
were added. While he was doing this he also made a detailed description of the nature and 
setting out of the ship's pay ledgers.75) 
 During the 1880s Heeres took upon himself th e responsibility for arranging the bulk of 
the VOC archives. In fact it was impossible to talk about clearly delineated VOC archives, 
because the documents had become thoroughly mixed up with other colonial archival 
holdings. Heeres commenced his task of making an inventory by separating documents of 
private origin from the records of the VOC proper. Then he began by describing the archives 
of the so-called pre-companies, after which he attacked the arranging and describing of the 
VOC archives. For the limits of the archives he took 1602, the year the VOC was founded, 
as the beginning and 1795, the year in which its administration passed into the hands of the 
government, as the closing date. He rounded off the provisional arranging and describing of 
the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber in 1891, and two years later he finished those of 
the Zeeland Chamber. In these archives his principal concern had been the description of 
the overgekomen brieven en papieren. While he was working on the definitive arrangement 
of the records which had been kept in the secretarie of the Amsterdam Chamber, he was 
appointed professor at the Indische Instelling (College of the Indies) in Delft in 1897. 
 His task was assumed by H.T. Colenb rander, who completed the arranging and 
describing of the secretarie archives of the Amsterdam Chamber. In the category of 
documents received from Asia Colenbrander introduced a break of before and after 1614. 
The documents from before 1614 were classified according to voyage, in a manner that was 
identical to the way in which Heeres had compiled t
he inventory of the archives of the pre-
companies. The documents from after 1614, when a more permanent central administration 
had been established in Asia and the chambers in the Republic could count on a more 
regular stream of papers from Batavia, were arranged chronologically.76) 
 When this had been accomplished, Colenbra nder set to work on the archives of the 
Zeeland Chamber. First of all he classified all the documents received by factory and not by 
year, as had been the case for the Amsterdam Chamber. Then Colenbrander described the 
documents originating from the three departments of the Zeeland Chamber: those of the 
equipage, of koopmanschappen (commerce) and the thesaurie (finance). In this inventory 
there was as yet no description of the financial documents. 
 Between the years 1898-1902 Colenbrander and the former State Archivist, Th.H.F. van 
Riemsdijk, carried out a very regular written discussion about the way in which the 
inventory of the VOC archives should be compiled. Both believed that the inventory should 
reflect as much as possible the working of the administration of the VOC, but there were too 
few documents still extant to really do this justice. The goal remained, completely in the 
spirit of Heeres, to return the records as far as possible to their place of origin and to weed 
out the documents that did not belong in the VOC archives. In accordance with this policy, 
documents from the collections, arbitrarily formed since 1856, of the East Indian section of 
the colonial archives, which did not belong to the VOC archives proper, were traced by 
Colenbrander to archives of special VOC committees 77) or to private archives of directors. 
Furthermore, Colenbrander reunited the enclosures of the generale missiven (general 
letters) from the Governor-General and Council to the Zeeland Chamber with the VOC 
archives, from which these enclosures had been separated for quite some time.78) 
 In 1902 the advisory committee for 's-Rijks Geschiedkundige Publicatiën (National 
Historical Publications), of which Colenbrander became the secretary, was set up. J. de 
Hullu took over the description and arrangement of the financial registers of the VOC from 
Colenbrander. In 1905 De Hullu introduced consecutive numbering, the so called K.A.-
numbering, into Colenbrander's draft finding aid 79). In his own new function Colenbrander 
worked to restore the original order of the overgekomen brieven en papieren which had 
been disturbed by De Jonge. He completed this in 1912. 
 After this a great stillness fell upon the VOC archives. During this time the archives of the 
pre-companies and of the six chambers were all provided with a finding aid in manuscript. 
Leaving aside some work which was carried out on the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber 
by R. Bijlsma, this silence was only broken in 1937 by Mrs. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz. She was 
given the task of compiling a new inventory of the archives of the Zeeland Chamber. As a 
result of the fact that, when the State Archives were moved from the Plein to Bleijenburg in 
1901, the VOC archives were not numbered according to the inventory of Heeres and 
Colenbrander, any consultation on the basis of the existing inventory, of the Zeeland 
archives in particular, was rendered extremely difficult. Therefore there was a pressing need 
for a re-processing. Mrs. Meilink-Roelofsz devoted most of her time to the description of the 
series of documents received from the factories in Asia in the archives of the Zeeland 
Chamber. Alongside this she reworked the manuscript catalogue of the archives of the 
Amsterdam Chamber compiled by Heeres and Colenbrander, as well as (re-processing the 
financial documents and the so called miscellaneous documents of both these chambers. 
She completed her task of processing of the VOC archives in 1963. A hundred years or 
more after the documents had been transferred to the General States Archives, an integral 
catalogue of the VOC archives was finally available. A few years later, on the basis of the 
new arrangement, the archives were numbered consecutively. The inventory - which fills 
nine typescript volumes - has greatly facilitated access to the VOC archives and has 
stimulated research into the history of the Dutch overseas, as well as Asian history. 
 One important component of the VOC archives, the overgekomen brieven en papieren 
were made even more accessible. In the Amsterdam Chamber at the time of the VOC itself 
access to these documents had been provided by means of tables of contents. However 
there were none of these for the volumes dating from before 1690. Mrs. Meilink-Roelofsz 
had these compiled. She also made sure that the tables of contents of all the overgekomen 
brieven en papieren in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber were typed out and made 
available to the public. 
 Mrs. Meilink-Roelofsz retired from the Gener al State Archives on the 1st January 1971, 
after she had accepted the position of extraordinary professor in the history of Western 
European overseas expansion. Although she continued to occupy herself intensely with the 
history of the early Dutch East Indies, she was not to be able to complete a book about the 
organization of the VOC and a general introduction to the inventory of the VOC archives. 
She died in 1988, shortly after work was begun on the publication of her inventory. 
 
Notes 
 
1. VOC, inv. nrs. 312-344, letter-book of outgoing documents [...] of the Heren XVII and 
the Amsterdam Chamber to establishments in Asia. 
 
2. See VOC, inv. nr. 741, duplicate-proceedings of the Governor-General and Council, 
especially 5th and 8th June 1725. 
 
3.Pieter van Dam, Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie
 first book, part I. F.W. 
Stapel ed. Rijksgeschiedkundige publications, grote serie 63 ('s-Gravenhage 1927) 395. 
 
4. VOC, inv. nr. 360, instructions of the Amsterdam Chamber to its employees; VOC, inv. 
nr. 7229, duplicate rules and regulations for the clerks in the schrijfkantoor in Amsterdam 
d.d. 1763 April 25th. 
 
5. VOC, inv. nr. 7230, draft notes concerning the work of the clerks in the schrijfkantoor of 
the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
6. VOC, inv. nr. 244, proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
7. VOC, inv. nr. 245, proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
8. VOC, inv. nr. 129, duplicate-proceedings of the Heren XVII; VOC, inv. nr. 259, 
proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
9. VOC, inv. nr. 131, duplicate-proceedings of the Heren XVII; VOC, inv. nr. 259, 
proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
10. VOC, inv. nr. 287, proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
11. VOC, inv. nr. 294, proceedings of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
12. Van Dam, Beschryvinge
 first book, part I, 371-388, 412, 413. 
 
13. Ibidem, 394. 
 
14. J.C. Overvoorde and P. de Roo de la Faille eds., De gebouwen van de Oost-Indische 
Compagnie en van de West-Indische Compagnie in Nederland (Utrecht 1928) 44. According 
to Overvoorde one objection to the storage of part of the VOC archives in the Oostindisch 
Buitenhuis was that it was too far away from the board room in the Hoogstraat. 
 
15. VOC, inv. nr. 360, instructions of the Amsterdam Chamber to its employees; Van Dam, 
Beschryvinge
 first book, part I, 402-404; G. Schilder, 'Het cartografisch bedrijf van de VOC' 
in: Patrick van Mil and Mieke Scharloo eds., De VOC in de kaart gekeken: cartografie en 
navigatie van de Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, 1602-1799 ('s-Gravenhage 1988). 
See also Chapter 5. 
 
16. In 1737 the director Radermacher was appointed one of the committee members. In his 
private archives there are still a number of documents relating to this charterkamer 
committee. Radermacher archives, inv. nrs. 190 and 354. 
 
17. VOC, inv. nrs. 13862-13865 and 14924-14926, (duplicate) inventories of documents in 
the archives of the Zeeland Chamber, 1612-1794. 
 
18. J.E. Heeres, 'De Oost Indische Compagnie' in: Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch Indië I 
(2nd impression; 's-Gravenhage and Leiden 1917) 505. 
 
19. Archives of the Raad der Aziatische Bezittingen en Etablissementen (Council for Asian 
Possessions and Establishments) (hereafter: Archives Aziatische Raad), inv. nr. 87, 20th 
December 1800. 
 
20. The lists of the archives of the Hoorn Chamber were compiled on 29th February 1796. 
See VOC, inv. nr. 14927. 
 
21. 'Register van de klerk Vallensis van alle de boeken, charters, missiven, documenten 
enz. welke voorhanden zijn geweest bij het kantoor der voormalige Oostindische Compagnie 
ter Kamer Delft ...' [c. 1802]; VOC, inv. nr. 14928. 
 
22. Overvoorde and De Roo de la Faille eds., Gebouwen
, 98; Roelof van Gelder and 
Lodewijk Wagenaar, Sporen van de Compagnie. De VOC in Nederland (Amsterdam 1988) 
111. 
 
23. Archives of the Comité tot de Oost-Indische Handel en Bezittingen (Committee for 
Affairs relating to East India Trade and Possessions) (hereafter: Archives Oost Indisch 
Comité), inv. nr. 11, committee proceedings, 11th April 1796; idem, inv. nr. 139a, minutes 
of the department for domestic administration in Asia and the Cape of Good Hope, 26th 
April 1796. 
 
24. Archives Oostindisch Comité, inv. nr. 11, Comité proceedings, 31st March 1796; idem, 
inv. nr. 154, minutes of the department of commerce and equipage, 31st March 1796. 
 
25. Archives Oostindisch Comité, inv. nr. 11, Comité proceedings, 14th April and 9th May 
1796; idem, inv. nr. 12, Comité proceedings, 4th July 1797. According to Overvoorde and 
De Roo de la Faille eds., Gebouwen
, 44, more than a thousand chests containing VOC 
archives were stored here. 
 
26. Archives Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 28, proceedings, 18th September 1800. 
 
 
27. Archives Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 87, letters from the external establishments, 20th 
December 1800; Idem, inv. nr. 34, proceedings, 29th August and 18th September 1804. 
 
28. VOC, inv. nr. 14928, inventory of the clerk Vallensis. 
 
29. Archives Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 34, proceedings, 25th September 1804. 
 
30. Idem, proceedings, 25th October and 23rd November 1804; Idem, inv. nr. 35, 
proceedings, 18th January and 5th March 1805. 
 
31. VOC, inv. nr. 14928, inventory of the clerk Vallensis. 
 
32. Archives of the Ministerie van Koophandel en Koloniën (Ministry for Commerce and 
Colonies) (hereafter: Archives Min. K. & K.), inv. nr. 35, fair copy report of the head of the 
First Division of the ministry, 12th February 1807. 
 
33. Archives of the Ministerie van Marine en Koloniën (Ministry for the Navy and the 
Colonies) (hereafter: Archives Min. M. & K.), inv. nr. 72, report 29th and 31st March 1809. 
 
34. VOC, inv. nrs. 14929 and 14930, Inventory of the colonial archives housed in the 
Departement van Marine en Koloniën (Department of the Navy and Colonies) in Amsterdam. 
 
35. Archives Aziatische Raad (Asian Council), inv. nr. 34, proceedings, 4th October 1804. 
 
36. Archives Min. M. & K., inv. nr. 110, minutes report of the head of the 7th, later 4th, 
division of the Ministry, 11th March 1809. 
 
37. Archives Min. M. & K., inv. nr. 111, minutes report of the head of the 7th, later 4th, 
division, 30th September 1809, nr. 249. 
 
38. Archives Min. M. & K., inv. nr. 65, minutes report of the minister, 17th October 1809. 
 
39. Archives of the Ministerie van Koloniën (Ministry of Colonies) (hereafter: Archives Min. 
Kol.), inv. nr. 57, report 9th December 1850, litt. A, nr. 5. 
 
40. Archives Min. M. & K., inv. nr. 137, 21st January 1810. 
 
41. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, Van geheim tot openbaar. Een historiografische verkenning.
 
(Leiden 1970) 12. 
 
42. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 57, report 9th December 1850, nr. 5; Idem, inv. nr. 841, 
report 28th May 1831, nr. 17.  
 
43. The collection of maps, which had been in the Depot-Generaal van Oorlog (General 
Depot for War) since 1806, the bulk of which were transferred to the French Dépôt de la 
Marine (Navy Depot) in 1810 is not discussed here. See Chapter 5. 
 
44. Archives Min. K. & K., inv. nr. 216; contains amongst other documents a memorandum 
for the year 1811 from Mr. Dozy, head of the third division of the Ministerie van Koophandel 
en Koloniën and future head of the Hollandse Divisie (Dutch Division) of the Ministerie van 
Marine en Koloniën in Paris, about the desirability of transferring the colonial archives to 
Paris. To this he appended a list of documents concerning the East which were in the 
Netherlands at that moment and should remain there. In total this list consists of 8372 
volumes; not included are 7028 volumes concerning establishments. In another list he 
indicated which documents had already been packed for Paris. This refers to the 21 chests 
already mentioned. Archives of the Hollandse Divisie of Marine en Koloniën in Paris, inv. nr. 
6. 
 
45. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 111, report 2nd September 1815, nr. 1252. Contains a 
survey of the documents which actually arrived in Paris in 1811. 
 
46. Archives of the Hollandse Divisie of the Ministerie van Marine en Koloniën in Paris, inv. 
nr. 6; Archives of the Generale Intendance voor de Financiën en der Publieke Schatkist 
(General Department for Finances and the Public Treasury), inv. nr. 955, minutes, 17th 
April 1812; Idem, inv. nr. 1032, Letter from the carrier Bruynseraede, 23rd November 
1813; Archives of the General State Archives (hereafter: Archives ARA), inv. nr. 3, nrs. 270, 
271, 274, 274a and 295; nr. 274a gives an overview of the documents which Tourlet 
thought should be forwarded to Paris. 
 
47. Archives ARA, inv. nr. 4, nr. 37; Min. Kol., inv. nr. 119, report 16th February 1816, nr. 
966; Archives of the Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken, Legatie Frankrijk (Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, French Legation), inv. nr. 80: contains a list of the documents returned and 
a catalogue of the maps which were in the Netherlands in 1810, a part of which were taken 
to Paris. 
 
48. Goldberg Collection, inv. nr. 124: contains amongst other items an inventaris der 
charters, boeken en papieren toebehoorende aan het Departement van Koophandel en 
Koloniën, welke in de charterkamer van het zelve Departement op het Binnenhof in 's-
Gravenhage zijn overgebragt, den 28 augustus 1816 (inventory of the charters, books and 
papers pertaining to the Department for Trade and the Colonies, which were transferred to 
the records room of that same Department in the Binnenhof in The Hague, 28th August, 
1816); Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 37, report 11th September 1816, nr. 5452a: contains the 
same inventory. 
 
49. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 300, report 27th November 1821, nr. 26/1; Idem, inv. nr. 
302, report 17th December 1821, nr. 25/1. It concerned 28,920 kilos of paper, which 
according to a note by Mrs. Meilink-Roelofsz, involved 9,500 to 10,000 volumes. 
 
50. VOC, inv. nr. 14931, Inventaris van het Oost Indische Archief berustende in het 
Westindische Magazijn te Amsterdam opgemaakt ingevolge resolutie van den Minister voor 
de Marine en Koloniën, 6 dec. 1828, litt. G&H, nr. 46. (Inventory of the East India Archives 
housed in the Westindische Storehouse in Amsterdam compiled as the result of the decision 
of the Minister for the Navy and the Colonies, 6th December 1828, litt. G&H, nr. 46). 
 
51. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 841, 28th May 1832, nr. 17. Amongst other things, this 
contains detailed lists of the books and papers present and of the books and papers from 
the pay office that were present and were to be cleared out. 
 
52. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 841, report 16th June 1832, nr. 18. 
 
53. Thuisreisboeken were probably a sort of ship's pay-ledgers kept during the homeward 
voyage. All that is known about the landboeken is that they, at least in the Amsterdam and 
Zeeland Chambers, were set out according to establishment and that amongst other things, 
they contained wills, inventories of possessions, and accounts of VOC personnel. 
 
54. Notwithstanding, even in Zeeland documents such as letter-books, dagregisters, 
resoluties and reports from Batavia were tidied up by the authorities. 
 
55. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 49, report 2nd November 1850, litt. A, nr. 6. 
 
56. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 841, report 28th May 1832, nr. 17. 
 
57. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 64, report 13th January 1851, litt. A, nr. 1. 
 
58. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 74, report 27th February 1851, nr. 13. 
 
59. Meilink-Roelofsz, Van geheim tot openbaar
, 12-14. 
 
60. J. Romeyn Brodhead, Documents relative to the colonial history of the State of New-
York, [1603-1678], procured in Holland, England and France I. E.B. O'Callagan ed. (Albany 
1856) xxv. 
 
61. Fred. Muller, 'Ervaringen in Nederlandse archieven', De Nederlandse Spectator 
11th July 
1874, 225-229. 
 
62. J.J.F. Noordziek, Archiefwezen 1826-1852. Met eene korte opgave van de inhoud van 
eenige boekerijen ('s-Gravenhage 1853) 66-71. 
 
63. L.C.D. van Dijk, Specimen Politico-juridicum Inaug. continens Historiam inquisitionis in 
delicta a praefectis atque officialibus in India cum orientalitum occidentali commissa 
(Utrecht 1847). 
 
64. Meilink-Roelofsz, Van geheim tot openbaar
, 14-16; Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 152, 
report 22nd January 1852, nr. 4. 
 
65. Muller, 'Ervaringen', 228. Frederik Muller can only have meant Van Dijk and De 
Munnick. 
 
66. Meijlink-Roelofsz, Van geheim tot openbaar
, 16-19; R. Fruin, De gestie van R.C. 
Bakhuizen van den Brink als archivaris des Rijks, 1854-1865 ('s-Gravenhage 1926) 65-78. 
 
67. Fruin, Gestie
, 76-77. According to Verslagen omtrent 's Rijks Oude Archieven 
(hereafter: VROA) 16 (1893) 7 at a certain moment these documents were reunited with 
the Company archives in the General State Archives. 
 
68. Archives ARA, inv. nr. 18, outgoing letters 1856, nr. 118. Bakhuizen van den Brink 
wrote this as a reaction to a suggestion from De Munnick to the minister of Foreign Affairs. 
Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 540, 10th September 1856, litt. A/1. 
 
69. In 1862 yet another large quantity of registers was cleared out. See report about the 
processing of the financial records of the VOC in the General State Archives by Van Meurs: 
VROA
 12 (1889) 6. 
 
70. Archives ARA, inv. nr. 64, nrs. 151, 183 and 224; VROA 
7 (1884) 2. 
 
71. Archives ARA, inv. nr. 83, nr. 341; Idem, inv. nr. 113, nr. 333; VROA
 24 (1901) 11-14. 
 
72. VROA
 12 (1889) 4-5; VROA 21 (1898) 6. 
 
73. VOC, inv. nr. 14932, Catalogue of miscellaneous documents, assembled from the East 
India archives by Leupe, ca. 1875. 
  
74. VROA
 14 (1891) 7; VROA 17 (1894) 6. 
 
75. VROA
 11 (1888) 11; VROA 12 (1889) 5-6. The survey is found in VOC, inv. nr. 14933. 
 
76. VROA
 21 (1898) 5-6. 
  
77. Such as de Hollands-Zeeuwse Staatscommissie (Committee of the States of Holland-
Zeeland ) of 1790 and the Comité van de Provisionele Representanten van het Volk van 
Holland tot de zaken van de Oostindische Compagnie (Committee for the Provisional 
Representatives of the People of Holland for the affairs of the East India Company) of 1795. 
These archives are described in the Inventaris van de Gewestelijke Besturen Bataafs-Franse 
tijd, 1795-1807, en hiermee samenhangende commissies, 1782-1802. III ('s-Gravenhage 
no date) 545-609. 
 
78. VROA
 24 (1901) 8-10. 
 
79. This K.A. (Koloniaal Archief - Colonial Archives) numbering remained in use until the 
recent re-arrangement and renumbering. A concordance of this is contained at the back of 
the inventory section. 
Chapter 3. NOTES ON THE USE OF THE VOC ARCHIVES 
 
B.J. Slot, M.C.J.C. van Hoof and F. Lequin* 
 
 
To a large extent the structure of the VOC archives follows that of the organization of the 
Company itself in the Republic. The records of the six chambers of the VOC constitute the 
six main archives. From the point of view of content and bulk, the archives of the 
Amsterdam and Zeeland Chambers are undeniably the most important. Most of the internal 
organization can be retraced in these two archives. This is much less true of the archives of 
the four remaining chambers, only a few larger or smaller fragments of which have escaped 
the hand of destruction. 
 The archival structure varies  slightly from chamber to chamber. The reason for this 
lies in the differences in the internal organization of the chambers or in divergent methods 
of archive management during the VOC period. Besides this, it is impossible to reconstruct 
the original order on the basis of the fragmentary remnants -most notably in the smaller 
chambers. Naturally the most conspicuous difference is the presence of the records of the 
Heren XVII
 (the directors of the Company) in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 Roughly speaking, the principal components of a Chamber archive follow a line which 
runs from the general to the particular, from the planning of policy to its implementation. 
This is most clearly observable in the arrangement of the archives of the Amsterdam and 
Zeeland Chambers: in both chambers, following the charters which form the constitution of 
the Company, come the resoluties
 (proceedings), the outgoing documents, the incoming 
documents, documents pertaining to committees and what are termed 'documents kept 
separately, originally miscellaneous documents'; all these are followed by the documents of 
the executive departments of the chambers. The position of the committees' archives forms 
an important exception to the arrangement according to the line of policy making. The task 
of the committees was pre-eminently one of policy-planning, but in the archives their 
records are placed after the resoluties
 and the incoming and outgoing documents. The 
abridged table of contents of the inventory provides a useful survey of the contents of the 
archives (See p....) 
 The main surviving categories of the ar chives are described in the notes which 
follow. Only very extensive categories of documents or those of outstanding importance are 
considered here. The descriptions treat the structure and content of the main series very 
briefly, provide instructions for their use and indicate specific finding aids. The archives of 
the Amsterdam Chamber are taken as the basis for the order in which the categories are 
discussed. 
 The first category is co mprised of the resoluties
 of the Heren XVII and of the 
chambers. These are especially important for research into policy as this was formulated in 
the Republic. The next section covers the uitgaande brievenboeken (letter-books of 
outgoing documents) of the Heren XVII
 and of the chambers: instructions to the 
octrooigebied (the area under charter to the Company) as well as documents within the 
Republic about activities and events in the octrooigebied. 
 This section is followed by the most extensive part of the archives: the various 
groups of documents sent from the octrooigebied
 to the Republic. These include the kopie-
resoluties (duplicate proceedings) of the Governor-General and Council, letters with 
enclosures sent directly to the Republic from the main establishments in the octrooigebied 
,and the various duplicate letters with enclosures sent to the Governor-General and Council 
from the subordinate establishments with enclosures (the so-called Batavia's ingekomen 
brievenboek or the Batavia letter-book of incoming documents). This section is vital to an 
understanding of policy, shipping and trade within the octrooigebied. It contains valuable 
data about local conditions and events in Asia. 
 Thereafter come, as far as they have surv ived, the archives of the committees of the 
Heren XVII
, which are extremely fragmentary. The description of this set of documents is 
followed by a section containing brief remarks about the files on various subjects which 
have been kept separately by the administration. This deal with a number of diverse. This 
concludes the central part of the description of the archives of the Heren XVII and the 
Chamber of Amsterdam and of the Zeeland Chamber. Finally the most important files of the 
archives of the departments (offices with specific assignments) and functionaries are dealt 
with. These include documents from the pay office which are very important for 
prosopographic research, as well as the accounts of the chambers which contain data about 
the economic activities of the Company in the Republic. 
 
1. RESOLUTIES (PROCEEDINGS) 
 
Heren XVII
 
Matters which affected the general management of the Company were discussed and dealt 
with in meetings of the Heren XVII. With the exception of a series of minuut-resoluties 
(draft minutes of proceedings) for the years 1654-1796 (inv. nrs. 24-98), three series of 
the resoluties taken during the meetings have been preserved: two series in the archives of 
the Amsterdam Chamber and the Heren XVII (inv. nrs. 99-145 and 146-210) and a series in 
the archives of the Zeeland Chamber (inv. nrs. 7343-7416). In the archives of the Zeeland 
Chamber the resoluties of the Heren XVII are to be found in the chapter ingekomen stukken 
uit Europa (documents received from Europe). The chapter which is headed resoluties only 
contains the proceedings of the chamber itself. Such a division ignores the fact that for two 
of the eight years the Heren XVII met in Middelburg and their resoluties were both recorded 
and copied there. 
 The resoluties
 were recorded in six fair copies, one for each chamber. The series 
which is described under inv. nrs. 146-210 contains such fair copies, in view of the label 
originele resoluties (original proceedings) on the spines of the volumes, as well as the 
presence of the signatures of the delegates following each final meeting day. In the intitial 
period the contents of letters and other documents, whether dispatched or received, was 
often inserted in the text. Later on such documents tend to be found increasingly frequently 
bound in as enclosures. After 1673 there marginals containing a short summary of the 
resoluties, which greatly facilitates research. The resoluties only contain the results of the 
deliberations of the Heren XVII and the decisions which were subsequently taken on the 
basis of these. Little or nothing of the discussions and differences of opinion can be traced 
in the resoluties. 
 The series which comes before the series of  fair copies in the inventory (inv. nrs. 99-
145) is a copy of the numbers146-210. One advantage of this series of duplicate resoluties 
is that, right from the very beginning, a short summary of the resoluties has been added in 
the margin. The documents which have been inserted in the text of the fair copies are also 
included in the kopie-resoluties, but unfortunately this has not always been the case with 
the enclosures bound with them. 
 Above each of the sessions the names of the seventeen delegates who attended are 
noted in the resolutieboeken (records of proceedings), with the name of the Chamber to 
which they belonged. Then the items of agenda for the meeting are summarized. These are 
the pointen van beschrvinge. There is a reference to the date of the resolutie concerned in 
the margin of each of the pointen van beschrvinge. Furthermore, even if the reading of a 
report or of a statement is merely referred to, the date on which this took place is recorded. 
Conversely, in the resoluties
 or there is a reference in the margin to which of the pointen 
van beschryvinge is intended. 
 The pointen van beschryvnge had to be sent to the chambers a good while in 
advance so that they could add supplementary material and formulate their opinions. 
Important topics that were not entered on the agenda in good time and which cropped up 
during or just before a meeting could not be handled without due notice. Only if there was 
absolutely no question of postponement, could they be dealt with extraordinaris (out of 
order). The final item on the agenda provided for the discussion of 'ordinary business' that 
had not been entered in the agenda. 
 Sometimes a chamber would s eek the advice of other chambers on a certain matter. 
If the resultant advice was unanimous this was considered tantamount to a decision taken 
by the Heren XVII. Should one of the chambers not concur in this opinion, the item then 
had to be entered upon the agenda of the Heren XVII and discussed at their meeting. 
 The resolutieboeken  can also contain the resoluties of the smaller halve Zeventien 
(Half Seventeen). The composition of this board varied from between eight to eleven 
delegates. Its decisions were as binding as those taken by the full complement of the Heren 
XVII. From 10 August 1660 onwards, the meetings of the halve Zeventien were noted as 
meetings of the Heren XVII in the resolutieboeken. A head count of the number of delegates 
present gives the answer to whether or not it concerns a meeting of the smaller halve 
Zeventien. 
 The archives of the Amsterdam Chamber co ntain a four volume subject index of the 
resoluties
 present (inv. nrs. 221-224). According to a note at the beginning of the index 
these include, first and foremost, the standing (= fixed, immutable) orders, instructions and 
regulations issued by the Heren XVII. Besides this, the index indicates many resoluties 
which were not standing orders but which serve 'on the one hand to indicate how many 
diverse matters and instances have been taken note of, discussed and dealt with, and, on 
the other hand, to be able to take cognizance of and (if necessary) to find with ease sundry 
affairs and instances which are of significance'. The entries run from Aannemen (engage) to 
Zijde (silk). Under each entry, all the resoluties concerned are mentioned chronologically 
with an indication of the contents. 
 The archives of the Zeeland Chamber cont ains an alphabetical repertory of the 
resoluties
 (inv. nrs. 7417-7422). On 22nd January 1743 the first two volumes which 
covered the period up to 1742 were offered to the directors of the chamber by the liquidatie 
boekhouder (clearing accountant), Thomas Cunningham 't Hooft. He had compiled the 
repertory virtually single-handed, not on the orders of the directors, but probably for his 
personal use. Perhaps this had some connection with his addditional function as archivist. In 
this repertory the resoluties
 are set out alphabetically according to the initial letter of each 
subject. The resoluties are listed chronologically under each letter. There is no lexicographic 
order beyond the first letter of the name of the subject. 
 Besides these larger series, smaller se ries and separate documents have been 
preserved. A few such examples are: in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber there are 
collected abstracts from the resoluties
 on ecclesiastical matters 1603-1671 (inv. nr. 212), 
draft secret resoluties 1738-1794 (inv. nrs. 216-218) and secret resoluties 1777-1794 (inv. 
nrs. 219-220); in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber there are duplicate resoluties 1618-
1623, 1657-1663 (inv. nrs. 7425-7427), duplicate secret resoluties 1779-1795 (inv. nr. 
7429) and collected abstracts of resoluties referring to matters of importance for the 
different departments of the Zeeland Chamber 1699-1728 (inv. nrs. 7432-7433); in the 
Hoorn Chamber there are duplicate secret resoluties 1790-1795 (inv. nr. 14327). 
 
The Amsterdam Chamber and the Zeeland Chamber 
Of the meetings of the boards of directors of the six Chambers of the VOC, only the 
resoluties
 of those of Amsterdam and Zeeland have survived. The Amsterdam resoluties 
begin with five volumes covering the period 1602-1629 (inv. nrs. 225-229). These are 
followed by a series covering 1623 to 1796 (inv. nrs. 230-304). Although the first four 
volumes are entitled Cladde vande dagelijcxse resolutien (rough drafts of the daily 
proceedings), they do, in fact, form part of a series. From 1707 onwards a short summary 
of every resolutie is recorded in the margin. The resoluties of the Zeeland Chamber cover 
the period 1601-1796 (inv. nrs. 7241-7278), but the margin summaries are only noted 
from 1745 onwards. 
 Besides the series mentioned above, seve ral smaller series and separate documents 
have been preserved. For the Amsterdam Chamber these are, for instance, drafts of secret 
resoluties
 for the years 1738-1794 (inv. nrs. 216-218) and secret resoluties 1777-1794 
(inv. nrs 219-220). For 
the Zeeland Chamber these include secret resoluties 1642-1787 (inv. nr. 7279) and draft 
resoluties 1770-1776 (inv. nr. 7240); and for the Hoorn Chamber secret resoluties 1691-
1794 (inv. nr. 14318). 
 The resoluties
 clearly reveal the working procedures of the Company. The chambers 
can be regarded as the executive arm of the Heren XVII. Besides this they had an important 
function in the planning of policy. In the executive operations of the chambers, the code of 
apportionment laid down in the charter was observed. In principle this was applied to all 
activities including the building and outfitting of ships, the dispatch of goods and ready 
money, and the reception and auctioning of merchandise. The chambers were bound to 
abide strictly by the decisions of the Heren XVII
 on such matters as outfitting and sales and 
could not digress from this on a single point. 
 The directors of the Chambers met as of ten as was necessary. Besides the ordinary 
meetings there were extraordinary sessions. During their meetings the directors discussed 
the various pointen van beschryvinge of the Heren XVII. The standing committees or 
departments of the chamber were directed to investigate the various points in conjunction 
with special committees appointed for this task and then to make a report to the plenary 
session. 
 The resoluties
 offer a glimpse of the large number of activities and responsibilities of 
the directors. A few examples will serve to demonstrate the diversity of these activities: 
they read the letters which had been sent from Asia; they appointed the personnel who 
entered the service of the chamber and compiled instructions relating to the various 
functions; they selected and appointed ministers of religion who were sent to Asia (in order 
to do so the directors of the warehouse listened to a sermon delivered by the aspiring 
candidate and then made their report to the plenary session of directors); they nominated 
delegates to the Haags Besogne (The Hague Committee which met in The Hague for a 
preparatory session in August); they dealt with the requests from Company officials who 
were leaving for Asia and wished to take somebody with them; and, finally, they made a 
decision about requests for subsidies from other chambers. 
 In the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber there is a subject index on the resoluties
 
consisting of four volumes (inv. nrs. 307-310). Just as in the case of the index on the 
resoluties of the Heren XVII, in the first place this index contains the standing orders, 
instructions and regulations of the Amsterdam Chamber. Furthermore, there are a great 
many references to decisions which are not strictly standing orders but which serve 'on the 
one hand to indicate how many diverse matters and instances have been taken note of, 
discussed and dealt with, and, on the other hand to be able to be able to take cognizance of 
and (if necessary) to find with ease sundry affairs and instances which are of significance'. 
Furthermore the names of personnel appointed have also been entered in the index, with a 
note on their salary, emoluments, and other forms of income, as well as the rent for their 
houses. The first volume, the index covering 1602-1743, begins with a reference to the 
instructions given to and the oaths sworn by VOC officials as apothecaries, bookbinders, 
clerks, smiths and sailmakers. The entries contained in the four volumes run from 
Aalmoezenier (chaplain) to Zijdewormen (silkworms). All the appropriate resoluties
 are 
recorded chronologically under each entry. 
 In the archives of the Zeeland Chambe r from 1736 onwards there are alphabetical 
indexes available in the resolutieboeken themselves. For the period 1783 to 1796 there is a 
separate alphabetical index for the resoluties
 (seven volumes; inv. nrs. 7280-7286). Each 
volume refers to one volume of resoluties. The resoluties are not arranged chronologically 
under the letters A to Z, but are placed in the sequence of and with reference to the pages 
on which the resolutie in question is to be found. 
 
 
 
 
2. OUTGOING DOCUMENTS 
 
The archives of the Amsterdam Chamber and the Heren XVII
 contain a series of letter-
books of outgoing documents to the kantoren (establishments) in Asia (inv. nrs. 312-344). 
Generally, instructions to the subordinate establishments were only passed on through the 
Governor-General and Council in Batavia. In the series of outgoing documents, the letters to 
the heads of the subordinate establishments which corresponded directly with the Republic 
(Cape of Good Hope, Persia, Malabar, Ceylon, Coromandel, Bengal and, in some eras, China 
and Surat) are therefore of less importance. The letters to the Governor-General and 
Council contain orders and reflections upon reports received from all the individual 
establishments. These letters are divided up into chapters according to establishments, the 
name of which is noted in the margin. There are also chapters pertaining to general policy 
in Asia. The letter-books also contain decisions passed in the Republic concerning matters in 
the area under charter, for which one will seek in vain among the resoluties
. The letters 
often betray a marked difference of opinion between the Heren XVII and the administration 
in Asia. In view of the great importance of these letters in the administration of the VOC, 
alphabetical subject indexes were compiled for them both in the Republic (inv. nrs. 345-
349) and in Batavia. 
 Up to 1642 the letters from the Amsterda m Chamber to the establishments in the 
octrooigebied
 have been included in the series of kopieboeken van uitgaande missiven 
(letter-books of outgoing documents) of the Heren XVII. After 1642 there is a separate 
series of kopieboeken van uitgaande missiven van de kamer (letter-books of the outgoing 
letters of the chamber) (inv. nrs. 350-354). 
 In the archives of the Zeel and Chamber just one single register of the letters from 
the chamber to the octrooigebied
 has been preserved (inv. nr. 7313). It covers the years 
1773-1794. Besides this, the archives of the Zeeland Chamber contain a series of 
kopieboeken van uitgaande missiven to the Heren XVII and to the other chambers. This 
series is of great importance for an understanding of the relationship of the chambers to 
one another (inv. nrs. 7290-7311). 
 
 
3. INCOMING DOCUMENTS FROM ASIA 
 
The documents which were received from Asia are the most important source for the history 
of Dutch activities in the octrooigebied
. Not only this,they are also a treasure trove of data 
about Asian history. 
 Two extensive series of such documents have survived: one in the archives of the 
Amsterdam Chamber, and a second in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber. It is advisable 
to commence an investigation in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber. Should some 
required documents be missing there, or should one be looking for further data, then it can 
be useful to also cast one's eye over the series in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber. 
There are no documents from Asia present in this latter archive from before 1680. 
 
I. Amsterdam Chamber 
When the Company launched its operations in Asia, initially it had no permanent 
establishments. The documents sent back from Asia during these years represent a fairly 
random collection of papers brought by homeward-bound ships. These are what are known 
asstukken betreffende de vroegste scheepstochten (documents pertaining to the earliest 
voyages), up to about 1614 (inv. nrs. 437-655). For the years 1607-1613, at the beginning 
of the series of overgekomen brieven en papieren (letters and papers received) mentioned 
below, there are also documents originating from the first permanent establishments (inv. 
nrs. 1053-1055). From 1614 onwards there is a fixed series of annual collections of reports 
with enclosures. 
 The structure of the records forwarded fr om the establishments from1614 onwards is 
fairly complicated. There appear to have been five important categories, but two of these 
have been almost entirely lost. These are the dagregisters (diaries) of the different 
establishments and the registers of the accountants stationed in Asia. To some extent this 
loss can be compensated by the other collections: by the archives of the boekhouder-
generaal (chief accountant), which were shipped to the Netherlands from Batavia in 1863, 
and by the dagregisters from Batavia in the Indonesian National Archives, which have been 
partially published.1) The three remaining blocks are a series of kopie-resoluties from the 
Governor-General and Council in Batavia, a series of duplicate documents dispatched by the 
Governor-General and Council, and the so-called overgekomen brieven en papieren uit de 
vestigingen (letters and papers received from the establishments), which can be further 
subdivided into various sections. 
 
Kopie-resoluties
 (duplicate proceedings) of the Governor-General and Council 
The kopie-resoluties of the Governor-General and Council are the reflection of the 
administrative activities of the highest VOC board outside the Republic, whose competence 
extended over the whole of theoctrooigebied. Like the resoluties of the Heren XVII and the 
chambers, they principally provide information about current administrative affairs affecting 
trade, appointments, issuing of regulations and the administration, but say little about the 
background to the policy. Only on a rare occasion does one come across data pertaining to 
colonial policy. For decisions on political matters, in the first instance the researcher should 
seek recourse to the uitgaande brievenboeken referred to below. 
 From the point of view of form the Batavian resoluties
 -in contrast to the resoluties 
of the Heren XVII and the chambers- are sometimes more like proceedings in the modern 
sense: in the event of fundamental administrative differences, the points of view of the 
various factions and persons have been noted. The ordinary resoluties
 are fairly complete 
(inv. nrs. 656-827). Before 1636 they were not always preserved as a separate series, but 
have been partly bound into the volumes of overgekomen brieven en papieren. The 
inventory notes these exceptions. 
 The only complete finding aids to the series of kopie-resoluties
 are the chronological 
tables of contents in each volume. Besides these there is an alphabetical repertory on 
personalia (appointments and similar matters) (inv. nrs. 828-834), and a summary, 
therefore incomplete, alphabetical repertory of the realia (subjects) (inv. nrs. 835-839). 
This latter repertory has also appeared in print.2) The lack of a good alphabetical subject 
index makes the series less easy to use than might otherwise have been the case. 
 The separate series of  kopie-secrete resoluties (duplicates of secret proceedings) 
only covers the years 1756-1791 (inv. nrs. 840-847). Many secret resoluties have been 
bound in with the series of ordinary resoluties, especially in the years 1704-1727. This is 
noted in the inventory. Moreover, secret resoluties have often been included in the 
overgekomen brieven en papieren. To gain access to these one should consult the 
typescript tables of contents available for this series. (The inventory does not indicate the 
place where the secret resoluties
, which are dispersed through the series ofovergekomen 
brieven en papieren, are to be found). 
 
Duplicate outgoing documents of the Governor-General and Council. 
This series contains the letters dispatched by the Governor-General and Council in Batavia, 
both to the establishments in Asia and to Asian authorities. The Batavia's uitgaande 
brievenboek (Batavian letter-book of outgoing documents to subordinate establishments) is 
available almost in its entirety in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber (inv. nrs. 849-
1052). The few parts of the letter-book which can be found in other places are mentioned in 
the inventory. These concern the documents dispatched in the period 1614-1634, which are 
to be found in the series overgekomen brieven en papieren. 
 To an even greater extent than the kopie-resoluties
 of the Governor-General and 
Council, the series of kopieboeken van uitgaande missiven (letter-books of the outgoing 
documents) provides a direct source of information about the administrative dealings of the 
Governor-General and the Council in the area outside Batavia and its environs. Here one 
comes across the political particulars which one often fails to trace in the resoluties. It is 
recommended that this series be used in combination with the uitgaande brievenboeken of 
the Heren XVII, which contain policy instructions from the board of directors in the Republic 
to the Hoge Regering (Supreme Government in Asia i.e. the Governor-General and Council). 
 Further access is offered in the tables of contents of the addressees, which are found 
in every volume. 
 
Overgekomen brieven en papieren (Letters and papers received) 
For the period up to 1614 the documents are described in detail in the inventory in the 
series stukken betreffende de vroegste scheepstochten (see above). In the post-1614 
period the documents were put together in a number of annual bundles, initially fairly 
haphazardly, but, after 1660, these documents were bound together in a clearly structured 
way, which is reproduced below: 
 
General Series: letters and papers received by the Heren XVII
 
and the Amsterdam Chamber from Asia 1607-1794 (inv. nrs. 1053-3987) 
This series is in fact a combination of the letters of the Governor-General and Council to the 
Heren XVII
 and the Amsterdam Chamber, plus enclosures, as well as the documents sent 
from those establishments which corresponded directly with patria. This series consists of 
annual batches comprised of the following components: 
a. Generale missiven (general letters) plus enclosures. 
b. Documents concerning the conduct of business in Asia, especially in Batavia, originating 
from the departments of the Governor-General and Council. 
c. Documents from the Raad van Justitie (Court of Justice). 
d. Documents, principally from offices in Persia and several other establishments in the 
Westerkwartieren (western part of Asia), which had been sent 'overland ' via Basra and 
Aleppo to the Republic. However, such records are not present for all years, but they exist 
for most years up to ca. 1730. 
e. Documents from a number of large establishments whose reports were sent directly tothe 
Republic, not through Batavia, (Bengal, Coromandel, Ceylon and Malabar, and occasionally 
Surat as well): letters, often accompanied by diaries, resoluties
 and documents concerning 
the administration of these establishments. Often these collections of documents are so 
extensive that in fact a duplicate archive of the establishments was created. 
f. The Batavia's ingekomen brievenboek (Batavian letter-book of incoming documents) 
which contains copies of all the letters received in Batavia from the establishments in Asia, 
often including comprehensive enclosures (resoluties
, diaries, copies of documents and 
administrative papers), which sometimes, as is the case with series e, are so extensive that 
they form a sort of duplicate archive of that establishments. These copies have been 
bundled according to establishments. In the eighteenth century the series is followed by one 
or more bundles of secret letters. 
 
Series of letters and papers received by theHeren XVII
 and the Amsterdam 
Chamber from the Cape of Good Hope, 1651-1794 (inv. nrs. 3988-4373) 
This series is similar to series b mentioned above, with the proviso that there are also 
volumes containing legal papers included. This series sometimes also includes papers from 
subordinate establishments (Mauritius), and from expeditions (to Madagascar and Rio 
Delagoa), as well as from other establishments (Persia and Surat) which forwarded their 
papers to the Republic via the Cape of Good Hope. 
 
Series of letters and papers received by the Heren XVII
 and the Amsterdam 
Chamber from China,1729-1794 (inv. nrs. 4374-4447) 
As these documents were handled by a separate committee, they also form a separate 
series. In some years they are to be found intermingled with the general series of letters 
and papers received from Asia. 
 
In the generale missiven, which are often very lengthy, the topics are usually dealt with 
according to an established sequence. First of all they contain a general report on shipping 
movements and trade, followed by a discussion of the various establishments, in a fixed 
order. The concluding section of the letters deals with financial and staff matters. In the 
letters from the establishments to Batavia the shipping movements, trade in general (first 
that of the main establishments and then of the subordinate establishments), trade per 
item, political news about local authorities, news about other European powers in the 
region, and personnel and legal affairs are treated in order of sequence. Moreover, the 
letters have often been provided with extensive postscripts referring to particular subjects. 
 From important establishments, especially  those in the Westerkwartieren, not only 
the letters to the Heren XVII
, but also those to the Governor-General and Council in Batavia 
are present. For instance, among papers from Coromandel, which were sent directly to the 
Heren XVII (series e), can also be found duplicates of letters to Batavia, while in the 
Batavia's ingekomen brievenboek there are copies of both letters from Coromandel to 
Batavia as well as of letters to the Heren XVII. There is a certain difference in tone between 
the letters from the establishments to Batavia and those addressed to the Heren XVII. 
Batavia was the immediate superior of the establishments and it was the place where 
important decisions were taken and local decrees were accorded approval. Therefore, letters 
to Batavia are usually more detailed, although it has to be admitted that information not to 
be found in letters to Batavia, is to be found in those to the Heren XVII. 
 Finally, mention should be made of the treaties and documents with Asian rulers. 
These may be found scattered throughout the overgekomen brieven en papieren. Moreover, 
there is a separate series of treaties present in the category afzonderlijk gehouden stukken 
(documents kept separately) (inv. nrs. 4777-4787). As treaties and documents with Asian 
rulers were only of interest to the management of the VOC in a Dutch translation, usually 
only such translations are to be found in the VOC archives. On only a very rare occasion is 
there an example of a treaty in the original language bound into the volumes of letters and 
papers received from Asia.3) 
 There are a number of finding aids to this  confused mixture of papers. The main aid 
is the tables of contents of the series of letters and papers received from Asia, the Cape of 
Good Hope and China. The typescripts of the tables of contents can be consulted in the 
General State Archives in a series consisting respectively of thirty-one, three and one 
volume. Most of them have been compiled from the original tables of contents. These 
mention each document separately, but their redaction is not consistent and they usually 
only provide a vague indication of the contents. If one knows with some degree of accuracy 
for what one is looking (as far as place and date are concerned) and the amount of material 
to be investigated is fairly modest, these tables of contents are a useful means of selecting 
material quickly. If the object of research is less sharply defined chronologically, one can 
use the publication of extracts from the general letters, published by W. Ph. Coolhaas and J. 
van Goor, as orientation material.4) This series has been furnished with good indexes on 
personal names, geographical names, names of ships, and affairs. Besides these, the 
repertories on realia and personalia in the Batavian resoluties
 can offer a survey of the 
period within which certain events occurred. 
 Should one wish to set up a broadly-bas ed investigation, a recommended procedure 
is to begin by reading through general documents which offer a summary account of 
events, and only then, possibly on the basis of the indications found in these, to search for 
more detailed documents via the tables of contents. There are various such series of 
documents of general contents which come into consideration here. Brief, but extremely 
useful, are the summaries of the documents which were received from Asia, compiled by a 
committee of the Heren XVII in The Hague, and which were used for composing the letters 
from the XVII to Asia. This annual abstract can be found in the reports of the Haags 
Besogne (inv. nrs. 4455-4506). The ultimate result of the work of the Haags Besogne is the 
kopieboek van uitgaande missiven (letter-book of the outgoing documents) of the Heren 
XVII , and this is especially important for the period for which there are no reports of the 
Haags Besogne available (inv. nrs. 312-344). More details are given in the Batavia's 
uitgaande brievenboek (inv. nrs. 849-1052), in which local events are often discussed at 
great length in letters and instructions to the subordinate establishments. Another method 
which may provide a useful starting point for a broadly-based investigation, is the perusal of 
the chronological tables of contents of the kopie-resoluties of the Governor-General and 
Council in Batavia (inv. nrs. 656-827). 
 
II Zeeland Chamber 
 
Generally speaking, the documents in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber which were sent 
from the octrooigebied
 are comprised of the same kind of categories as those in the 
archives of the Amsterdam Chamber. However, they have been arranged on a different 
basis: in the first place they are ordered according to the nature of the documents (letters, 
resoluties, diaries, etc.), then geographically and finally chronologically. (In the archives of 
the Amsterdam Chamber the documents are arranged firstly chronologically, then according 
to their nature and, finally, geographically). The geographical classification in the archives of 
the Zeeland Chamber is fairly slapdash; documents from a particular establishment can be 
filed in a bundle from another establishments. Such instances are fully indicated in the 
inventory. 
 
The series is subdivided into the following categories of documents: 
A: A very incomplete series of letters from the Governor-General and Council to the Heren 
XVII and the Zeeland Chamber, 1658-1792 (inv. nrs. 7527-7599). This series is therefore 
partially identical to series a of letters and papers received from Asia found in the archives 
of the Amsterdam Chamber. 
 
B: Kopie-resoluties
 of the Governor-General and Council (inv. nrs. 7600-7609). This 
concerns only a few resoluties, secret resoluties and minutes for several years during the 
eighteenth century. 
 
C: Duplicate dagregisters of Batavia. In contrast to the archives of the Amsterdam 
Chamber, the Zeeland Chamber possesses an admittedly small and fragmentary series of 
duplicate dagregisters from Batavia Castle of several random years during the period 1647-
1766 (inv. nrs. 7610-7617). 
 
D: Duplicates of the outgoing documents of the Governor-General and Council (inv. nrs. 
7618-7657), corresponding to the series of duplicates of outgoing documents of the 
Governor-General and Council in the Amsterdam Chamber. This series also shows many 
gaps. The letter-books of the outgoing documents cover the years 1683-1787, the secret 
letters the years 1755-1789. 
 
E: A series of kopie-ingekomen stukken (duplicate incoming documents) to the Governor-
General and Council from the establishments in Asia, which corresponds to the Batavia's 
ingekomen brievenboek (series f) and to series b of the letters and papers received from 
Asia in the Amsterdam Chamber, but in this instance divided up into geographical series, 
from about 1682 (inv. nrs. 7658-9179). This file does not form a continuous series; there 
are a great many lacunae. It is characterized by a very careless and inconsequential 
classification. Generally, establishments by establishments, the series of letters with 
enclosures have been included first, followed by a series of secret letters with enclosures. 
After this, series of documents such as resoluties
, dagregisters, letter-books of incoming 
and outgoing documents and a few documents to do with book-keeping, which were 
originally sent with the letters but later separated, can be included. In this series it is 
primarily the geographical classification that has been very inaccurately observed: many 
documents concerning a particular establishment have been filed with documents from 
another establishment. In the drawing up of the inventory, letters from two or more 
establishments have been mentioned under the name of the establishment which sent the 
bulk of the documents in the volume. There is always a cross-reference to the other 
establishments included. 
 
F: A series of documents pertaining to the book-keeping of the VOC establishments in Asia. 
It is mainly composed of the reports of the visitateur-generaal (the auditor-general) in 
Batavia from the years 1771-1786 (inv. nrs. 9180-9191). 
 
G: A series of documents from the Raad van Justitie (Court of Justice) in Batavia, which 
corresponds to the documents which have been mentioned in the archives of the 
Amsterdam Chamber under c. However, the series in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber 
is much more extensive (inv. nrs. 9192-9540). Amongst other papers, it includes letters to 
the directors at home, civil and criminal legal records, and case-files, largely from the 
eighteenth century. 
 
H: Series of documents originating from the factories in Bengal, Coromandel, Ceylon, 
Malabar, Surat, as well as a bundle of documents from Persia which had been sent home 
overland (inv. nrs. 9541-11024). To a certain extent, this series is comparable with series d 
and e of the letters and papers received from Asia in the archives of the Amsterdam 
Chamber 
 
 As is the case of those from the Am sterdam Chamber, the volumes contain old 
tables of contents, but there is no separate typed version of these available. 
 
4. ARCHIVES OF THE COMMITTEES 
 
There were various committees and besognes (working parties) of the directors, which 
carried out tasks which could not be finalized during the short sessions of the Heren XVII
. 
The most important of these were the Haags Besogne and the committee for the China 
trade. The Haags Besogne had to compose the draft letter of the Heren XVII in reply to the 
generale missiven from Batavia. In order to achieve this, a detailed annotated summary of 
the papers received was drawn up. The summary is divided up systematically according to 
establishment. In 1787 this task was assumed by what was known as the Vijfde 
Departement or Preparatoir Besogne (Fifth Department or Preparatory Committee). The 
reports of the Haags Besogne and of the Vijfde Departement or Preparatoir Besogne are 
present in the archives of the Amsterdam Chamber (inv. nrs. 4455-4506 and 4516-4529). 
 The file of the committee for the China trade included  in the archives of the 
Amsterdam Chamber consists of reports (inv. nr. 4542) and drafts as well as duplicates of 
outgoing documents to China (inv. nrs. 4543-4553). It is also furnished with a useful 
alphabetical repertory of the letters received from China during the years 1757-1779 (inv. 
nr. 4556). 
 A third committee was that charged with th e drawing up of the annual generale staat 
(annual balance sheet). The Company had no central book-keeping. Each year the six 
Chambers prepared a separate balance sheet. These six separate balance sheets were 
combined into the generale staat by a committee drawn from the Heren XVII
. In order to do 
this, every year the accountants of the Chambers presented themselves before this 
committee with journals and ledgers. Because of this method of keeping the books it is 
difficult to get an insight into the real financial position of the chambers and of the 
profitability of Company business as a whole. The summarized financial statements of the 
committee for the drawing up of the annual generale staat, compiled from the accounting of 
the various chambers, have been preserved from 1662 (inv. nrs. 4584-4597). The 
summarized statements of the Amsterdam Chamber are also available from 1642 (inv. nr. 
4583). 
 Few documents pertaining to the other committees of the Heren XVII  have survived. 
 
 
5. DOCUMENTS KEPT SEPARATELY, PARTLY ORIGINALLY MISCELLANEOUS 
DOCUMENTS 
 
Documents of diverse character, which cannot be retraced to the administration or the 
archives of a particular department of the chamber, have been brought together in the 
inventory under the section documents kept separately. Such papers exist only in the 
archives of the Chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland. The first part, documents pertaining 
to the management in Europe, is classified according to subject: these refer to such things 
as the legal status of the Company; personnel; ecclesiastical affairs in Asia; relations with 
European powers; documents dealing with the decline of the Company and proposals for 
improvements. In the second part, documents concerning the management in Asia, the 
documents are also arranged according to subject, such as registers of treaties concluded 
with Asian rulers; and papers concerning trade and personnel in Asia. They include a series 
of documents arranged geographically, divided up according to factory (inv. nrs. 4833-4926 
and 11229-11335). These provide a supplement to the overgekomen brieven en papieren). 
 
 
6. ARCHIVES OF THE DEPARTMENTS 
 
The rather fragmentary archives of the departments contain data about details of the 
business conducted by the various Chambers. These are the vestiges of the administration 
of the departement van de equipage (equipage deaprtment : outfitting of ships and 
navigation); of thesoldijkantoor (the pay office : personnel adminstration of VOC employees 
in the octrooigebied
 and on board ships); the departement van de commercie ( which 
administered the sale of merchandise and purchase of goods for Asia; in the Zeeland 
Chamber this is called the department of koopmanschappen ); thedepartement van de 
ontvang (cashier's office : payments, management of real estate; in Zeeland this was called 
departement van de thesaurie ); and of that of the opperboekhouder (chief accountant: 
capital stock, loans, payments in the Republic). 
 Large fragments of the archives of the ch ief accountant and of the pay office have 
been preserved for most of the chambers. Only in the archives of the chambers of 
Amsterdam and Zeeland are there any documents from other departments still available, 
but only in very depleted numbers. Gaps 
can sometimes be filled in, or at least an impression gained of the composition of the lost 
archives, from the personal archives and collections of directors and personnel in the 
Republic. 
 A reasonably large amount of material  from the equipage departments of the 
chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland is still extant.In this one can find an incomplete 
collection of regulations and other documents to do with the outfitting, crews and navigation 
of ships. Also available in the archives of the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland is a very 
incomplete collection of ship's logs (inv. nrs. 5049-5142 and 11417-11439). The so-called 
uitloopboekjes , registers of ships put to sea (inv. nrs. 4932-4943), provide information 
about the ships leaving port for the various chambers, noting the names of the captains, 
the number of crew members, the dates of departure and arrival, the tonnage and so forth. 
The publication of all these data in the two volumes of Dutch-Asiatic Shipping has more or 
less rendered consulting of these books superfluous.5) 
 The archives of the departemente n van de ontvang/thesaurie and of 
commercie/koopmanschappen are so incomplete that they afford only very limited use for 
any research. 
 
I. Pay Office 
 
The pay office was responsible for the administration of the entire personnel in the various 
establishments and factories of the VOC between the Cape of Good Hope and Nagasaki Bay, 
as well as those on board the ships of the VOC which plied the intra-Asian trade routes. For 
the period 1700-1791, this administration has survived pretty well intact. Personnel in the 
Republic do not fall within the scope of this survey. 
 The personnel records from the eighteenth  century consist of: 1) generale land-en 
zeemonsterrollen (general land and sea muster-rolls); 2) scheepssoldijboeken (ship's pay-
ledgers); and 3) de rollen van de gekwalificeerde civiele en militare dienaren (rolls of the 
qualified civil and military employees).6) All in all it contains personal data about some 
620,000 people and runs to a good 1.2 million pages. The volumes fill a total of about 245 
metres and take up one-fifth of the total volume of the VOC archives. The amount of work 
involved in the administration of personnel and pay can be shown by the following piece of 
arithmetic. If we work on the assumption of one original volume plus six copies of the 
general land and sea muster-rolls, two series of the rolls of the qualified civil and military 
employees and one series of ship's pay-ledgers, this means that a good 2,275,000 pages 
were written up in the algemeen soldijkantoor (general pay office) in Batavia. From the 
general land muster-rolls for Batavia between 1700-1791 it appears that an average of 137 
people were engaged in the work in the fourschrijfafdelingen (clerks' offices) in Batavia: the 
generale secretarie (central administration), the algemeen soldijkantoor (general pay 
office), thesoldij-visitekantoor (pay auditing office) and the monsterrolschrijvers (clerks of 
the muster-rolls). During the same period there was an average of six clerks occupied with 
the generale monsterrol (general muster-roll). On the basis of the known facts, the total 
production of these people must have been 1,225,000 pages. This works out at ten pages 
per clerk per day, for what one assumes was the six-day workweek and the seven-hour 
working day customary at that time. 
 Besides the muster-rolls and the pay-ledgers , the archives of the pay office contains 
some other documents referring to the winding up of pay agreements, especially a series of 
wills made by personnel who had died in Asia (inv. nrs. 6847-6927) and other papers 
relating to legacies. In the disquisition which follows only the personnel administration will 
be examined. 
 Despite the fact that they have been ente red in the inventory as separate series, the 
general land and sea muster-rolls, the ship's pay-ledgers and the rolls of qualified civil and 
military employees form a coherent whole. This is an important source both for research 
into an individual Company employee or 'employee' as he was known and for a serial 
investigation (for instance, into mortality among Europeans in the East). 
 The legibility of the general land and sea muster-rolls and of those of the qualified 
civil and military employees is good; conversely, the ship's pay-ledgers are fairly difficult to 
decipher. 
 
Machinery of the Personnel Administration 
All six Chambers of the VOC in the Republic not only had their own ships, but also their own 
employees and personnel administration. The personnel administration within the Republic 
was decentralized. In Asia it was centralized in what was known as the algemeen 
soldijkantoor (general pay office) in Batavia, which was under the charge of the algemeen 
soldijboekhouder (paymaster general). 
 For instance, as soon as a ship from th e Amsterdam Chamber sailed for Batavia, all 
VOC employees on board were registered in two identical ship's pay-ledgers immediately 
after departure. Upon their arrival in Batavia, the current accounts of these employees were 
closed in the ship's pay-ledger and the wage owed by the Company for the duration of the 
voyage was entered under the credit of each individual employee. Each employee was then 
issued individually with an extract from the ship's pay-ledger bearing a statement of the 
soldijrekening (balance). One of the copies of the ship's pay-ledgers which arrived in 
Batavia was sent back to the Amsterdam Chamber. The other remained behind in the 
algemeen soldijkantoor in Batavia. 
 
 We shall now follow in the footsteps of an  employee who pursued his Asian career in 
Batavia and Bengal. If he remained in Batavia for a number of years, then, every year on 
31st August, the wage he had earned was registered at the algemeen soldijkantoor on that 
particular page in the ship's pay-ledger on which the account of this employee was kept. He 
was obliged to present himself in person at the office every year on 30th June in order to 
have himself registered on the general muster-roll. Each year he was once again given an 
extract from the ship's pay-ledger containing the new balance of his account. During his 
career, the empoyee was able to garner a whole collection of such extracts, which he had to 
keep. The moment of his departure to Bengal his current account in Batavia was closed. He 
was issued with an extract containing the new balance which included the wage owed to 
him for the current year (up to the date of departure from Batavia). On his arrival in Bengal 
the employee presented this extract and he was then registered in the personnel 
administration of the main establishment in Bengal at Chinsura. 
 During his posting to Bengal, every year  the employee presented himself at the 
annual muster at the pay office at Chinsura on 30th June, or else at one of the subsidiary 
establishments. In the latter event, this office passed on the information to Chinsura. Also 
in Bengal the amounts owed to the employee were annually entered into his account on the 
31st August and he was issued with an extract. The head office at Chinsura informed the 
algemeen soldijkantoor in Batavia of these annual registrations or, as the case may have 
been, of the death or of the departure from Bengal of that employee. By means of what 
were known as comptoirboeken, which are no longer available, all the factories and 
establishments of the VOC between the Cape of Good Hope and Japan, kept the algemeen 
soldijkantoor in Batavia abreast of changes to be entered into the ship's pay-ledgers. 
Alterations in the current accounts of employees aboard the ships involved in the intra-
Asian trade were passed on to the algemeen soldijkantoor by means of the binnenlandsche 
scheepsboeken, which have also not survived. The pay office in Batavia registered these 
changes in what were known as slapers: theoriginele (originals) of the ship's pay-ledgers 
and of the land and sea muster-rolls. 
 At least once a year the algemeen soldijka ntoor kept the personnel administration of 
the Amsterdam Chamber informed of the new entries in the slaper of the ship's pay-ledger 
by means of what was termed the quohier, an extract made from that ship's pay-ledger. 
This enabled the Amsterdam Chamber to keep the other copy of the ship's pay-ledger up to 
date. The algemeen soldijkantoor was obliged to provide annual copies of the general land 
and sea muster-rolls in sixfold for forwarding to the six chambers in the Republic. 
 If an employee was dismissed by the Gove rnor-General and Council in Batavia, he 
personally received his last statement of account with his final balance upon handing over at 
the algemeen soldijkantoor all the pay-slips he had accrued during his career. In return for 
these, upon his return to the Republic, he or his proxy was paid the amount stated on the 
account at the pay office of the chamber which had employed him. In the event of his 
decease outside the Republic, the amount was paid to a relative or to a proxy. 
 Employees who entered Company service in Asia, in contradistinction to the 
Republic, were entered in the muster-rolls as in dienst (in service) and fell under the 
administration of the Amsterdam Chamber. As this category of people had not reached the 
East by VOC ship, there are no ship's pay-ledgers for them. Nonetheless, their salary 
administration, both in Batavia and in the Republic, was carried out in the same fashion as 
for the other employees. 
 
General Land and Sea Muster-Rolls 
The muster-rolls annually furnish a complete specification of all the land and sea personnel 
in Asia, with 30th June as reference date. In the eighteenth century this involved an 
average of 18,500 land personnel and 3,200 employed at sea. Therefore, every year there 
were on an average nearly 22,000 employees operational in the trading area of the VOC. 
 On 11th October 1686 the Heren XVII  decided to introduce the annual registration of 
the entire personnel on land or at sea throughout the whole of the octrooigebied. Prior to 
1686, apparently, there had been no general registration of personnel carried out. 
 With the help of the comptoirboeken and the binnenlandsche scheepsboeken 
summaries were compiled annually in thealgemeen soldijkantoor in Batavia containing the 
workforce in all establishments and factories of the VOC and on all the ships plying the 
intra-Asian trade routes. Each year these summaries were put together rewritten as one 
whole, the general land and sea muster-roll. This copy was kept as slaper in the algemeen 
soldijkantoor and provided the basis for the six transcripts destined for the six chambers. 
 Meteorological conditions made it impossible for all the individual rolls to be available 
in Batavia at the same time. A set routine, dictated by the weather, developed. First of all 
the returns for Batavia and a fixed number of other establishments which were available on 
time were completely rewritten into one whole and dated on the 15th January following the 
30th June to which the return referred. This was what was known as the first roll, called a-
rol in the finding aid on the general land and sea muster-rolls. Returns which arrived later 
were put together in the first restantrol (remainder-roll) (b-rol), and, if necessary, in a 
second restantrol (c-rol), generally dated at least one year later than the first roll. 
Occasionally an aparte rol (separate roll) from one of the establishments was sent directly 
to the Republic, thus bypassing Batavia, and was then added to the muster-roll to which it 
pertained in order to complete it. 
 Two series of the six copies of the gene ral land and sea muster-rolls of the six 
chambers are still extant. The series of the Zeeland Chamber begins in the year 1691, 
probably the first year that the general land and sea muster-rolls were compiled, and 
continues up to and including 1791 (inv. nrs. 11534-11820). The land and sea muster-rolls 
in the archives of the Zeeland Chamber have been split into two groups. The sea muster-roll 
has only been included in with the land muster-roll after 1780. The series in the Amsterdam 
Chamber begins in 1720 and continues up to and including 1791 (inv. nrs. 5168-5239). The 
Zeeland series is plagued by more lacunae than that of Amsterdam. In some instances the 
Zeeland series can stop a gap in the Amsterdam series. When one is considering the period 
1691-1791, then, with the exception of one year (1707), one has a continuous series of 
yearly returns which make up a total of 126 volumes at one's fingertips. The years 1790 
and 1791 are very incomplete; there are no general land and sea muster-rolls for the years 
1792 up to and including 1795 in the VOC archives. 
 The method of registration for a land muster-roll ran according to the following 
procedure. Within one particular establishment the return of the main establishment was 
treated first, after which, if necessary, those of any subordinate establishments were 
considered. The registration of the personnel within one establishment was classified 
according to professional category; within one of the professional categories represented at 
that establishment, the registration of all members of the personnel followed a strictly 
hierarchical order. (See Appendix 9 for the model of the layout of one page of the general 
land and sea muster-rolls.) 
 At the beginning of the volumes of the ge neral land and sea muster-rolls there are 
various contemporary surveys which offer some insight into the copious material. In the 
case of the land muster-rolls these are lists of: 1) the names of the establishments 
registered in the muster-roll; 2) the total number of employees in each separate 
establishment; 3) the total number of employees registered in the volume in question. The 
sea muster-rolls have been supplied with lists of the names of the ships registered in them, 
with the crew numbers (with indication of the folio) and of the total number of all the crew 
members of all the ships together. 
 Generally at the end of a land muster-ro ll there are what are called a korte sterkte 
and a korte samentrekking. A korte sterkte provides a recapitulation of the number of staff 
of each separate establishment included in that muster-roll, classified according to 
establishment and according to the professional categories represented in that 
establishment. The korte samentrekking provides a summary of the total strength of each 
of the seven professional categories, which together comprised the land staff, and which 
can be found in the muster-roll concerned. In contrast to the korte sterkte, the last 
mentioned survey contains no specification of the names of the various establishments. The 
korte samentrekking was not always consistently classified in the course of the eighteenth 
century. There are separate recapitulations concerning the inlandsche dienaren (native 
employees), whose names are only incidentally mentioned, for the years 1700-1755 and 
1782-1791. These surveys can be found either in a separate roll which follows directly upon 
the korte sterkte, or at the end of the korte samentrekking itself. 
 At the end of the sea muster-rolls ther e is merely a korte samentrekking which 
offers an idea of the range of the professional categories which were to be found among 
those on board the registered ships. 
 A detailed finding aid has been made for the muster-rolls which indicates where the 
returns from the various establishments and factories with their workforce are to be found, 
and which also offers an insight into the presence of the various contemporary registers and 
surveys.7) Appendix 10 provides a schematic outline of which establishments are to be 
found for which years in the land muster-rolls. 
 
Ship's pay-ledgers 
Data about aboard which ship personnel who had entered the Company's service in the 
Republic arrived in Asia can be found in the muster-rolls. This information provides a key to 
the scheepssoldijboeken (ship's pay-ledgers). One minor complication arises if one is 
dealing with a employee who broke his journey at the Cape of Good Hope for any length of 
time, be it short or long. In this case data about his career can be found in the ship's pay-
ledgers of the ship on board which he sailed from the Republic. 
 In principle each ship which sailed from the Republic had its own ship's pay-ledger 
which bore the name of that ship. As well as being called a scheepssoldijboek, a ship's pay-
ledger was also known as a principaal grootboek. Until the moment of disembarkation in 
Batavia the ship's pay-ledger bore the character of a ship's muster-roll, in the sense that it 
provided a rundown of all those on board. After arrival in Batavia mutations in the career of 
the employees were kept up to date in the copies of the ship's pay-ledgers in Batavia and in 
the Republic. The ship's pay-ledgers of a good ninety per cent of all the ships which sailed 
from the Republic to Asia during the eighteenth century have survived. This is not as 
surprising as it may seem at first sight. Even long after the VOC had been liquidated, the 
personnel administration had to remain available for the verification of the financial claims 
of the next-of-kin of former VOC employees.8) Alterations were being entered into the 
ship's pay-ledgers for a long time after 1795. For instance, in 1813 the Algemeene 
Commissie tot Liquidatie der Pretentiën (General Committee for the Settlement of Claims) 
was instigated in The Hague. 
 The collection of the ship's pay-ledge rs for all six chambers amounts to 2991 
volumes. What is known as the nieuwe serie (new series), far and away the largest part, 
dates from the eighteenth century. The oude serie contains only 198 volumes: 20 volumes 
for the period 1633-1670; the remaining 178 volumes covering the years 1672-1699. The 
nieuwe serie (2793 volumes) begins in 1699/1700 and continues up to and including 
1794/1795. As the Amsterdam Chamber employed the greatest number of personnel, 
nearly half of this (1374 volumes, inv. nrs. 5269-6842) comes from the archives of this 
chamber. The number of ship's pay-ledgers preserved in the archives of the other chambers 
are respectively: 636 (Zeeland, inv. nrs. 12672-13307); 205 (Enkhuizen, inv. nrs. 14638-
14842); 205 (Delft, inv. nrs, 13876-14080); 195 (Rotterdam, inv. nrs. 14102-142960); and 
181 (Hoorn, inv. nrs. 14348-14527 I). The ship's pay-ledgers which are still extant are the 
copies which were remitted to the Republic after the arrival of the ships in Batavia. 
 A ship's pay-ledger consists of a series of  rekeningen courant (current accounts). At 
least two pages have been reserved for each employee. Viewed superficially, the left and 
right hand pages resemble the debit and credit sides of a somewhat overgrown household 
account book. Closer inspection reveals that it is more complicated. (See Appendix 11 for a 
model of the layout of one page the ship's pay-ledgers.) 
 The left hand page. The following item s are listed from top to bottom: 1) two 
months' wages in advance to the employee; 2) his outfit, for which the employee was 
responsible, with, if necessary, money borrowed from the VOC; 3) if required, any other 
amount owed by the employee (the vaderlandse schuld or home debt); 4) a single or 
multiple amounts paid by the VOC in the Republic to family members or proxies of the 
employee out of his credit accrued during his appointment in Asia; 5) the final payment in 
the Republic after the end of his Asian career, either after his death or upon repatriation. 
 The right hand page. The following items are listed from top to bottom: 
1) the payment, either credited partly or fully by the VOC, for salary due during the voyage 
to Batavia; 2) any eventual debt from the left hand page deducted from this; 3) sums 
credited to the employee by the VOC, based on either the whole or, as the case may be, 
part of the wage he had earned during a whole or part of a financial year (1st September up 
to and including 31st August). The amount of these sums depended on the extent to which 
the employee used his official wage to cover his living costs and the amount of private 
income he had at his disposal, for instance from private trade. These entries were always 
related to activities carried out in the past financial year. Should the employee have been 
posted to one particular establishment for many years, his wage was entered annually on 
31st August. A new entry was also made in the ledgers each time the employee moved to 
another establishment. Each time a new wage was credited to his account his place of work 
was mentioned. There is one exception to the rule that the geographical career of an 
employee can be traced from the mention of his posting: those employees who were posted 
on the island of Deshima in Nagasaki Bay were registered as being employed in Batavia. 
 It should be stressed that the items listed on the right hand side of the ship's pay-
ledgers are not payments made to the employee while in Asia. This is obvious from the 
current accounts of the employees who made no claim on payments in the Republic during 
the whole of their working lives in Asia (items on the left hand page). In these accounts, the 
sum of the amounts credited on the right hand page is the only one mentioned on the left 
hand page as the only amount paid out (final payment) by the VOC in the Republic. 
 The items noted on the right hand side refer only to the official VOC wages and 
therefore do not take account of any emoluments and legal profit shares. There was one 
exception to this rule for the employees in Canton. Their legal, sometimes considerable, 
profit shares are noted in the ship's pay-ledgers. 
 In by far and away the largest number of ca ses, the series of items concludes either 
with the date and place of death, or with the date on which the employee left Batavia or 
arrived in the Republic. In some cases the last amount credited on the right hand page is 
the last information about the career of an employee; there is no mention of his decease or 
of his departure or of his return to the Republic. It is only very seldom that both the date of 
departure from Asia and the date of return to the Republic are noted on the right hand side 
of the ship's pay-ledgers. Perhaps it was arranged so that the date of departure from the 
East was recorded if an employee had no paid function on board during his homeward 
voyage, and, conversely, that the latter had been the case when his date of arrival in the 
Republic is recorded. 
 At the beginning of a ship's  pay-ledger there is what is known as an alphabet or 
register of first names of the employees registered in it. No alphabetical order has been 
followed within one particular initial letter. These indexes are not always reliable. Besides 
this, certain documents relating to an employee have occasionally been bound into a ship's 
pay-ledger: a will of an employee who died during a voyage or a will and/ or an estate 
inventory of an employee who died in Asia. 
 There is a register which gives access to  the numbers of the oude serie and the 
nieuwe serie of ship's pay-ledgers, subdivided under the six different chambers.9) 
 
 
Rolls of the Qualified Civil and Military Employees 
The ship's pay-ledgers provide information about the places to which an employee was 
posted (place of work). With the help of a register of geographical names this furnishes a 
key to the rolls of qualified civil and military employees.10) These rolls refer to the higher 
land personnel (gequalificeerde ), in other words all the higher civil ranks commencing 
withjong assistent (junior clerk), and all the higher military ranks commencing from 
sergeant. 
 Amongst other information the rolls of the qualified civil and military personnel 
provide data which is not to be found for instance in the ship's pay-ledgers on such things 
as in which rank and function an employee passed his life at the posting concerned. This 
source also provides an insight into the system of advancement within the VOC. 
 For each year the rolls contain personal details of all the qualified employees in all 
the VOC establishments from the year 1701 up to and including the year 1787, including 
the year 1707 which is missing from the general land and sea muster-rolls. A complete 
series has been preserved from both the Amsterdam and the Zeeland Chambers 
respectively (inv. nrs. 5240-5261 and 11821-11928). The Amsterdam pay office bound the 
civil and military rolls together, whereas in Zeeland they were kept separate. A different 
number of years has been bound in each volume each time. 
 Every year all the establishments forwarde d their returns to Batavia with 30th June 
as their reference date. The only exception was the Cape of Good Hope, the returns from 
which were sent directly to the Republic. These individual returns, with the civil and military 
personnel together in one survey, were rewritten into two separate returns, dated Batavia 
the last day of February of the year that followed the date to which the registration 
referred. Thus there was one roll, divided per establishment, for all the qualified civil 
employees in all establishments and another separate roll for all the qualified military 
employees in all establishments. The Cape sent its return in one single document directly to 
the Amsterdam Chamber, where it was bound together with the other returns. If the arrival 
in Batavia of a return from a particular establishment was delayed, this roll was then sent 
(with the civil and military employees in one return) to the Amsterdam Chamber under 
separate cover. 
 The rolls are divided up according to es tablishment and the registration of the 
individual employees follows a strictly hierarchical sequence from the highest to the lowest. 
(See Appendix 12 for a model of the layout of one page of the rolls of the qualified 
employees.) 
 With the exception of the separate rolls (those sent later), the registers of the 
qualified employees have been provided with various indexes. Indexes of the names of the 
VOC establishments which occur in that roll are only to be found at irregular intervals; 
moreover they are far from complete and contain few details. The key to all the place-
names occurring in the rolls of the qualified civil and military employees, mentioned earlier, 
as well as an index of place-names with all the variations in spelling to be found in the rolls 
offers a solution to this. 
 There are regularly recurring indexes of the first names of the employees included, 
however by the 1780s these are mostly according to surname. In the registers for the civil 
employees for the years 1737-1787, and the registers for the military employees for the 
years 1765-1768, 1770, 1772-1775, 1777, 1779-1781, and 1785-1787, only the names of 
the personnel stationed in Batavia are recorded. 
 The foregoing survey gives an idea of the way in which the individually discussed 
series of sources can be considered as a whole. Appendix 13 reproduces this again 
diagrammatically. 
  
 
II. Chief Accountant 
 
The VOC did not have a centralized book-keeping department. To the bitter end, the book-
keeping remained cluttered and fragmentary, organized as if it was that of some makeshift 
companies without any connection with each other, instead of that of one trading 
corporation. Every year the chambers did make up their balance sheets on the basis of their 
ledgers and journals. To our eyes the balance sheets seem to be pretty rudimentary, not 
least because operations in Europe and Asia were kept completely separate. The six balance 
sheets, which were the fruit of each chamber's endeavours, were then combined into a 
generale staat by a committee of the Heren XVII. 
 Each Chamber of the Company had its own opperboekhouder (chief accountant). In 
the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland he was assisted by several clerks. The 
accountants kept the journals and the ledgers, as well as the registers of applications for 
and the transfer of shares up to date. Besides the accountants, each chamber had cashiers, 
who managed the ready money the cash-box. All expenditure had to be recorded in a 
specieboek or cashbook. 
 
Subscription of Capital and Dividends 
When the VOC was incorporated in 1602 it was laid down that every resident of the 
Republic could have a financial stake in the business. The amount involved was left open 
and the subscribers could invest their capital for multiple terms. One could subscribe to the 
chamber of one's choice. The share, which was called an actie, had no uniform nominal 
value and was always negotiable: it could be sold, exchanged or used as collateral. Transfer 
of shares had to take place before the book-keeper in the presence of one or two directors, 
both of whom also signed the deed of transfer. 
 Each chamber paid out dividends on the basis of the capital subscribed to that 
chamber. Dividends were paid out on the basis of the amount of money invested by the 
shareholders. The percentage was determined by the Heren XVII
 either every year or every 
couple of years. Payment occasionally took place in the form of spices. In 1679 for the first 
time the Company was forced to pay out its dividend in the form of bonds. These bonds had 
not yet matured and the Company could always redeem them. 
 The oldest subscription registers of the Amsterdam and Zeeland Chambers have 
been preserved and have been published (inv. nrs. 7064 and 13794).11) Likewise the 
ledgers with the capital accounts of the shareholders have also survived (inv. nrs. 7067, 
13795-13797 and 13799). The ledgers of the Zeeland Chamber run up to 1710. In them 
each shareholder has a separate current account, with entries of the debts and claims which 
resulted from changes in a shareholder's share portfolio. 
 The transfer of the shares, often with a ppendices, of all the chambers have been 
preserved (Amsterdam, inv. nrs. 7083-7118; Zeeland, inv. nrs. 13802-13805 and 13807-
13812; Delft, inv. nrs. 14089-14092; Rotterdam, inv. nrs. 14298-14301; Hoorn, inv. nrs. 
14549-14551; and Enkhuizen, inv. nrs. 14849-14852). The registers begin about 1750 and 
most of them continue up to the liquidation of the Company. Only the archives of the Hoorn 
Chamber still contain seventeenth century transfers. The transfers are on preprinted forms. 
The appendices can contain interesting information, such as the function, profession and 
place of residence, about both vendor and purchaser. If the transfer was in connection with 
a legacy, extracts from the will are often also included. 
 In view of the fact that there are no indi cations the purchaser received a transcript of 
the transaction, the possession of shares by a particular person, and the extent of his 
holdings, can only be demonstrated from the transfer registers and the ledgers with the 
capital accounts. 
 The archives of the Amsterdam Chamber cont ain a series of ledgers of the dividends 
paid on shares for the period 1628-1796 (inv. nrs. 7068-7081). The Zeeland Chamber 
possesses these ledgers for 1710-1747 and 1760-1800 (inv. nrs. 13800 and 13806) and 
Enkhuizen for the years 1720-1802 (inv. nr. 14853). In these ledgers it was also the 
practice to accord each shareholder a separate entry. On the left page there is a statement 
of how many shares a person owned, on the right hand side how much was paid out every 
year, or sometimes every second year. Furthermore, the archives of the chambers of 
Amsterdam., Zeeland and Hoorn have several loose eighteenth century documents about 
dividends (inv. nrs. 7123-7125,13801,and 14547). 
 The documents mentioned above concerning subscription of capital, transfers and 
dividends are not merely useful for research from the point of view of business economy. 
They can also furnish data about very diverse subjects such as individual people, the 
distribution of share holdings of the Company in the Republic, and the capital resources of 
various sectors of the population. For instance, it is possible to trace the role of immigrants 
in the financing of East Indian ventures. 
 
Loans 
A second category of documents in the archives of the chief accountants deal with the 
money borrowed by the Company, obtained by issuing bonds and anticipatiepenningen (see 
below). The bonds were of a long-term duration. When a loan was floated, shareholders 
were given priority. Initially the bonds were signed by two directors, but this number was 
increased to four after 1670. 
 As well as structural financial shortages, after the arrival of the ships from Asia the 
VOC often faced problems of liquidity before the auctions had been held. This was when the 
money owed to repatriated VOC employees and the wissels (bills of exchange) brought by 
the return ships had to be honoured. Moreover, in the spring, money had to be paid out to 
the shareholders. The Company was forced to borrow money in order to meet these debts. 
It did this bij anticipatie, anticipating the profits to be made on the sale of the merchandise. 
The loan was sometimes just for a matter of weeks and at the very most for six months. 
 The archives of the Amsterdam Chamber still contain one journal and one ledger of 
the interest paid on bonds and a memoriaal (daybook) of registered anticipatiepenningen 
(inv. nrs. 7128-7130). In the Zeeland Chamber there is a journal and a ledger of 
anticipatiepenningen from 1680 (inv. nrs. 13832). Furthermore, there are, principally 
among the documents of the Amsterdam and Zeeland Chambers, still a few loose 
documents preserved such as lists of bondholders and of holders of anticipatiepenningen 
(inv. nrs. 7131-7133); accounts of the payment of the 100th and 200th penning (a sort of 
tax?) (inv. nrs. 7139-7140,13831 and 13835, and 14304) and receipts (inv. nr. 14303). 
These documents date from very divergent years during the entire era that the Company 
was operational. 
 
Book-keeping 
The VOC practised its own form of double or Italian book-keeping. Both a journaal (journal) 
and a grootboek (ledger) were entered up. Daily recurring financial transactions, such as 
money received, payments, subsidies to or from other chambers, money borrowed bij 
anticipatie, repayments, income from the sale of the merchandise, dividends to 
shareholders, and the payment of salaries, were first of all recorded in the memoriaal 
(daybook). In the chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland this daybook was called boek van 
de ontvangers or boek van de thesauriers. Then the data were entered into the journal and 
the ledger and calculated. The quantity and price of goods bought and sold was added. The 
journal was divided up chronologically; in the ledger entries were arranged per business 
relation, per product or per object of expenditure. 
 Amounts to do with the building and outfi tting of ships, such as wages paid to 
workmen, for shipbuilding materials, for victualling of the ships for the voyage, and for the 
provision of ready money, merchandise and various requirements for Asia, were accounted 
for in the ledger under equipage costs. Each section such as beer, butter, bread, 
koopmanschappen and requirements for Asia, sailcloth, navigational equipment, and galley 
provisions, had a separate account. In their turn, some sections were even more closely 
specified. Besides this all deposits, withdrawals and credits were recorded. No record of 
theretouren ( return goods) was entered in the ledgers. The authorities in Asia stated the 
purchase price of the retourgoederen; this was noted in the resoluties
 of the Heren XVII. No 
profit and loss account was made up. At the end of the financial year the balances of the 
income and expenditure were transferred to the item retouren generaal (general returns) in 
the ledger. 
 In the journal, which is arranged chronologically, each item is headed with the 
keyword entry that is also used in the ledger. In the margin there are cross-references to 
the relevant page in the ledger. Also in the ledger each item begins with a cross-reference 
to the relevant page in the journal. The record in the journal is the most detailed. For 
instance, next to a payment to a baker for bread delivered, there is also a record of the 
amount of bread which he provided as well as how much this cost per loaf. The ledger 
merely records that a certain sum was paid to the baker for bread delivered. The advantage 
of the ledger for research is that all the expenditure of bread delivered for a certain 
embarkation is noted together in one place. 
 A journal begins with a summary of those who had been promoted since the 
previous amount was closed and in this book are given credit as a consequence. These are 
followed by those with debts who were now in the red. The journals are divided up per 
calendar month. First of all, for instance, the total sum of money paid out to third parties 
during that month is recorded, and the amount is then specified: wages; barber's 
requisites; supplies for ship's crews; commissions on imported goods which had been sold; 
house rent and so forth. The records are pretty detailed. One item like wages can be 
subdivided again into various payments. Each record of payment is accompanied by the 
name of the recipient. 
 Each entry begins with a cr oss-reference to the page in the corresponding ledger. In 
the ledger under wages there is simply a record of the date, then the fact that the recipients 
were paid wages for work in the warehouse and so forth, and the total amount paid. Just as 
in the case of the equipage ledgers, all the amounts paid out as wages during the duration 
of the ledger are put together. One disadvantage for the researcher is that the entries are 
noted per equipage and thus not by individual ship. 
 From the seventeenth century, only th e oldest journals and ledgers from the 
chambers of Amsterdam and Zeeland have survived (inv. nrs. 7142, 7169 and 13782-
13785), and there is one journal from the Enkhuizen Chamber (inv. nr. 14854). The 
archives of the Zeeland Chamber still contain a few separate journals and ledgers from the 
equipage department for the years 1614-1628 (inv. nrs. 13786-13793). From 1700 
onwards, the journals and ledgers of the chambers of Amsterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen (in 
this last instance incomplete) have been preserved (Amsterdam inv. nrs. 7143-7168 and 
7170-7194; Hoorn inv. nrs. 14554-14623; and Enkhuizen inv. nrs. 14855-14909). Most 
ledgers have either an index bound in or else a separate one. The archives of the Delft 
Chamber contain a single journal for 1768-1772 (inv. nr. 14084) and the Rotterdam 
Chamber a series of undated indexes (inv. nrs. 14305-14315). 
 The archives of the Zeeland Chamber co ntain several loose documents concerning 
accountants and the office of accountant, for the most part correspondence (inv. nrs. 
13770-13781); the Hoorn Chamber still has a few documents originating from the cashier 
(inv. nrs. 14541-14542). The Amsterdam Chamber still has a series of balance sheets 
extracted from the eighteenth century ledgers (inv. nrs. 7195-7204) and a series of 
notations of entries in the journals (inv. nrs. 7206-7212). Besides these, there are several 
loose financial documents from the chambers of Amsterdam, Zeeland, Delft and Hoorn 
preserved (Amsterdam inv. nrs. 7214-7226; Zeeland inv. nrs. 13758-13769; Delft, inv. nrs. 
14082-14083 and 14085-14086; and Hoorn inv. nrs. 14543-14544). 
 
Notes 
 
 The division of labour between the auth ors was as follows: B.J. Slot wrote the 
introductory section and the parts about the outgoing documents, the documents received 
from Asia, the archives of the committees, the documents kept separately about the 
administration of the chambers, as well as the introductory paragraphs to the departmental 
archives. M.C.J.C. van Hoof treated the resoluties and, under the departmental archives, 
the parts dealing with that of the chief accountant. F. Lequin was responsible for the section 
about the pay office. 
 
1. J.A. van der Chijs et al. eds., Dagh-register gehouden int Casteel Batavia vant 
passerende daer ter plaetse als over geheel Nederlandts-India (31 volumes; Batavia and 's-
Gravenhage 1887-1931). The period covered is 1624-1682, albeit with many gaps. 
 
2. Realia. Register op de generale resolutiën van het kasteel Batavia 
(3 volumes; Batavia and 's-Gravenhage 1882-1886). 
 
3. A number of such documents are still held as separate series in the Indonesian National 
Archives. Furthermore a collection of miscellaneous letters, possibly from the archives of the 
Dutch establishments in India, has found its way into the archives of the Hoge Regering in 
the General State Archives. Several documents are also present in the archives of the 
factories in Japan and Canton. Various similar documents were also kept by VOC employees 
as curiosa, and were dispersed throughout museum and manuscript collections. A few 
miscellaneous documents are to be found in the collection Aawinsten van de Eerste Afdeling 
in the General State Archives and in several private archives. It should also be mentioned 
that there is a collection of letters from rulers in the Riau and Malacca in the archive of the 
naval officer, Van Braam (General State Archives). 
 
4. W. Ph. Coolhaas and J. van Goor eds., Generale missiven van gouverneur-generaal en 
raden aan Heren XVII
 der Verenigde Ooostindische Compagnie. Rijks geschiedkundige 
publicatiën, grote serie 102, 112, 125, 134, 150, 159, 164, 193 and 205 (9 volumes; 's-
Gravenhage 1960-1988). At the moment at which this introduction was being written this 
publication covers the period up to 1737. 
 
5. J.R. Bruijn, F.S. Gaastra and I. Schöffer, Dutch-Asiatic Shipping in the 17th and 
eighteenth Centuries. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën, grote serie 165-167 (3 volumes; 
Den Haag 1979 and 1987). Volumes 2 and 3 contain data about various VOC ships on the 
high seas. 
 
6. The following instructions and analyses have been based on the systematic study of this 
voluminous archival collection; see: F. Lequin, Het personeel van de Verenigde Oost-
Indische Compagnie in Azië@in de achttiende eeuw, meer in het bijzonder in de vestiging 
Bengalen (2 volumes; Leiden 1982); Chapter I and pp. 580-592 give details about 
archivalia which give information about personnel. 
 
7. F. Lequin, Toegang op, en systematisch overzicht van de getalsmatig ontlede en in kaart 
gebrachte gegevens uit de 126 banden generale land- en zeemonsterrollen van de VOC 
1700-1791 (Typescript; Leiden 1978). 
 
8. Archive of the Colonial Ministry, inv. nrs. 2990-3010; Archif van de Comptabiliteit Oost-
Indische Bezittingen (Archive of the of the East Indian Possessions), inv. nrs. 149-165, 167, 
190 (see Lequin, Personeel, 230 note 64. 
 
9. Klapper op de scheepssoldijboeken van de VOC (Register of the ship's pay-ledgers of the 
VOC), General State Archives (typescript; n.p., n.d.). 
 
10 F. Lequin, Klapper op de plaatsnamen die voorkomen in de rollen van de 
gekwalificeerden van de kamer Amsterdam, 1701-1787 (typescript; Leiden 1976). This 
register is housed in the reading room of the General National Archives, code 1.04.24. 
 
11.J.G. van Dillen, Het oudste aandeelhoudersregister van de Kamer Amsterdam der Oost-
Indische Compagnie. Werken uigegeven door de Vereniging Het Nederland Economische-
Historisch Archief 14 ('s-Gravenhage 1958); W.S. Unger, 'Het inschrijvingsregister van de 
kamer Zeeland der Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie', Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek 
24 ('s-Gravenhage 1950) 1-33. 
CHAPTER 4. OTHER ARCHIVES OF VOC INSTITUTIONS AND OFFICIALS 
 
B.J. Slot 
 
 
The VOC archives consist of the archives of the boards of directors of the six chambers and 
several archives from departments and offices of these chambers. However, many more 
institutions and persons working under the aegis of the VOC produced archives but only a 
part of their archives has been preserved. A number of of institutions and persons from 
among these can be singled out: there are the archives of the establishments of the 
Company in the octrooigebied (the area under charter to the Company), the archives of the 
subordinate offices of these establishments, and archives of officials of the VOC in the 
Republic and of the VOC employees in the octrooigebied. Some of these archives have 
remained in the place where they were created, some are to be found in public archive 
depositories in the Netherlands, and yet others have ended up in manuscript collections at 
home in the Netherlands and abroad. 
 Only a few of the archives of the ma ny establishments of the VOC in the octrooigebied 
are still left. The largest and most important of these are located in countries with 
climatologically adverse conditions and are sometimes in a precarious state. Moreover, the 
lacunae in them are much more serious than those in the VOC archives in the Netherlands. 
As a result, searching abroad for the text of a document which has been lost in the 
Netherlands is in many cases fruitless effort. On the other hand, the archives of 
establishments in the octrooigebied also contain a lot of material that was never sent to the 
fatherland, in particular documents concerning the local administration. 
 The archives still remaining in the Arsip Nasional (National Archives) in Jakarta consist 
of the archives of the Governor-General and Council, other government bodies in Batavia, 
and fragments of archives from other establishments in Indonesia. In Sri Lanka, India, and 
South Africa are still extensive archives of the former VOC establishments there. Among 
these archives those of Batavia are the largest, but many of the series have disappeared 
from the archives or there are only fragments now present. As far as structure is concerned, 
the archives of Ceylon and South Africa are the most intact. Also in a reasonably good 
condition, in particular the section from the eighteenth century, are the Malabar archives in 
Madras, but their structure is no longer easily discernible because of a chronological 
reorganization which took place under English rule. In the General State Archives, besides 
the VOC archives proper, there are also documents originating from the Hoge Regering 
(Governor-General and Council) and the chief accountant in Batavia, the archives of the 
factories in Japan and Canton, and fragments of the archives of Dutch establishments in 
India. Smaller parts of the archives of officials and factories can also be come across in 
family archives and manuscript collections. 
 In general, it can be stated that the struct ure of the overseas administrative archives is 
somewhat ambivalent. Contemporaneous Dutch administrative archives are usually based 
on one or more series of resoluties (proceedings) with annexes, but in the various archives 
of the VOC establishments the marked deference to higher authority (the Governor-General 
and Council in Batavia, c.q. the directors in the Republic) led to to correspondence with 
superiors being accorded a central place, while the resoluties with their annexes are 
directed more towards the local administration. This is the reason that alphabetical indexes 
on the correspondence with superiors occur more frequently superiors than indexes on the 
resoluties. The dagregisters (diaries) occupy a place apart in the structure of the archives. 
It sometimes seems that these dagregisters, as is the case with the English factory 
archives, form the backbone of the archives. Namely, in the dagregisters there is a detailed 
report of incoming and outgoing correspondence. However, it is only on rare occasions that 
this role is really evident. 
 
Dutch judicial and notarial archives also evolved in the octrooigebied of the VOC. In 
principle these archives were produced by VOC employees or persons or bodies which were 
subject to the local VOC authorities. Such judicial and notarial archives have generally been 
kept in the archives of the particular establishment. They are present in Jakarta, Sri Lanka, 
India, and Cape Town, and for Japan and Canton in the General State Archives. One part of 
the legal archives from Batavia (several series from the archives of the bench of aldermen 
and the weeskamer or orphan board were transferred to the General State Archives in the 
nineteenth century. 
 
 
1. THE JAKARTA ARCHIVES 
 
Far and away the largest archives from the octrooigebied of the VOC are those of the 
central administrative bodies in Batavia. During the Dutch administration, these were kept 
in the so called Landsarchief, now the Arsip Nasional in Jakarta. A printed inventory of this 
was published in 1882.1) This inventory is quite primitive and it is difficult to trace the 
various documents back to the administrative bodies which produced the archives in 
Batavia. The first 99 pages of this inventory concern documents of the Governor-General 
and Council and of the commissarissen-generaal (commissioners-general). The documents 
originating from various other administrative agencies in Batavia are mentioned on pages 
100-112. Finally, pages 113-354 describe what are called gewestelijke stukken (regional 
documents). It seems that these harbour a mixture of documents received by the 
Governor-General and Council from the buitenkantoren (outer establishments) and several 
miscellaneous remnants of the archives transferred from these buitenkantoren. Moreover, it 
should be remarked that, in contrast to the VOC archives in the General State Archives, the 
archives in Jakarta were not stopped in 1795. Van der Chijs' inventory contains documents 
up to and including the English Interregnum (1816), and in a few instances even later. 
 From the point of view of form the archives  in Jakarta are largely typical administrative 
archives, consisting of series of resoluties and enclosures. The arrangement of the archives, 
however, is somewhat curious. The first category of the inventory contains the stukken uit 
patria (documents from home). Besides the letters from the Heren XVII, there are also 
those from individual chambers. Of particular importance among these are letters from 
those chambers of which very few documents have been preserved in the Netherlands: 
Delft, Rotterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen, as well as letters from the Zeeland Chamber dating 
from the seventeenth century. 
 A second category is formed from the Indische stukken (documents produced in Asia). 
These include the resoluties from the Governor-General and Council in Batavia plus the 
annexes. The resoluties form a less complete series with the same contents than those in 
the VOC archives in the Netherlands. The series korte notulen (abbreeviated minutes) are 
alphabetical tables of contents which in the VOC archives are bound in with the resoluties. 
There is a series of bijlagen (annexes) which mainly refer to the administration in Batavia 
and its environs. These annexes are not to be found as a series in the Dutch VOC archives. 
They are very significant for providing background to the decision-making of the Governor-
General and Council concerning the administrati
 on in Asia. Furthermore, the category 
Indische stukken contains the dagregisters which were compiled at Batavia Castle, the bulk 
of which are not to be found in the VOC archives in the Netherlands, and letters to the 
subordinate establishments. Of the latter letters there is a much less complete series than 
that in the Batavia's uitgaande brievenboek (Batavian letter-book of outgoing documents) in 
the General State Archives. There is also a small collection of original treaties and contracts 
concluded with local rulers in Asia. 
 The archives of various services and offices of the central administration in Batavia and 
the archives of the Hoge Raad van Justitie (High Court) have been put into this same 
category ofIndische stukken. It seems that only a small portion of these archives has 
survived: from several bodies, including the Raad van Justitie, much more is to be found in 
the copies sent annually to the Netherlands now in the VOC archives. The book-keeping 
registers of the chief accountant in Batavia were brought to the Netherlands last century to 
replace the duplicates there which had been destroyed in the intervening period (they now 
constitute the archives of the chief accountantin Batavia in the General State Archives). 
 The division gewestelijke stukken (regional documents) in the old inventory of the 
Landsarchief is a combination of widely different documents, which shows no sign of the 
application of the principle of provenance. The first part, concerning Batavia, contains the 
archives of all sorts of local administrative bodies and officials like the town adminstration, 
the bench of aldermen, and the notarial archives. Some of these were not really VOC 
institutions. However, the second part, referring to the establishments outside Batavia, do 
indeed consist mainly of VOC archives. These are largely originals of documents received, 
an anthology of transcripts of which is present in the VOC archives in The Hague as 
Batavia's ingekomen brievenboek (Batavian letter-book of incoming documents) in the 
Overgekomen brieven en papieren (letters and papers received). In this series one would 
expect to come across the large quantity of documents which had been sent to Batavia from 
the buitenkantoren. This is not the case as can be checked by using the lists of each 
consignment of these documents, which are found for each establishment in the Batavia's 
ingekomen brievenboek. This is the greatest gap in the Jakarta archives. Only from 
establishments within Indonesian territory, and from these then only from the later VOC 
period, is there any respectable number of documents received preserved. This means that 
the Batavia's ingekomen brievenboek in the VOC archives in The Hague contains far and 
away the most complete series of letters received from the subordinate establishments in 
Asia. 
 
 
2.ARCHIVES TRANSFERRED FROM BATAVIA KEPT IN THE GENERAL STATE 
ARCHIVES 
 
I. Archives of the Hoge Regering or Supreme Government in Batavia 
 
The archives of the Hoge Regering mainly concern areas outside Indonesia. It was 
transferred to the Netherlands from the Landsarchief in 1863. It is a heterogeneous 
collection of documents of widely disparate origin. Besides indexes compiled in Asia and 
other finding aids to important series, there are considerable sections of the correspondence 
of several factories and a number of memories van overgave (final reports) in this holding. 
It seems that the bulk of the collection derives from the series of gewestelijke stukken from 
the Landsarchief, which have been already mentioned. Furthermore, it is possible that there 
are also documents which originated from the archives of the Dutch establishments in India 
and which were later transferred to Batavia. The collection of documents of the former 
Dutch possessions in India, mentioned below, has been extracted from this holding (see 
Section 4). When this holding was split up this was done very carefully so that any dubious 
cases have been left in the collection of the Hoge Regering. There is a provisional inventory 
for the collection.2) 
 
II. Archives of the boekhouder-generaal (chief accountant) in Batavia 
 
The book-keeping records of the boekhouder-generaal in Batavia were brought to the 
Netherlands to replace those which had been destroyed there. These contain a series of 
general ledgers and journals and negotiegrootboeken (trade ledgers) and journals, nearly 
all of which date from the eighteenth century.3) 
 
III. Archives of the weeskamer (orphan board) in Batavia 
 
In 1863 a series of eighteenth century journals and ledgers from the weeskam
 er in Batavia 
were brought to the Netherlands.4) 
 
IV. Archives of the schepenbank (bench of aldermen) in Batavia 
 
The section from the archives of the bench of aldermen in Batavia, which was brought to 
the Netherlands in 1863, consists principally of financial records and case files dating from 
the eighteenth century.5) 
 
 
3. ARCHIVES IN INDIA 
 
After the cession of the remaining Dutch establishments in India to the English authorities in 
1825, parts of the archives of these establishments (Coromandel, Surat and Bengal) were 
sent to Batavia, from where it was shipped to the Netherlands in 1863. It now forms the 
collection of the Voormalige Nederlandse Bezittingen in Voor-Indië (Former Dutch 
Possessions in India) in the General State Archives (see Section 4). The bulk of the Dutch 
archives which remained behind in India were taken over by the English administration. 
Many, if not most, records seem to have disappeared between that time and the present.6) 
Several remnants were finally concentrated in the State Archives in Madras, while a few 
other holdings are still to be found elsewhere in India. The archives of the Dutch 
establishment at Cochin in Malabar were untouched by these operations and, since 1795, 
remained continuously in the hands of the English government in Madras, passing into the 
hands of the Indian government in 1947. 
 This means that by far the most Dutch arch ives in India are now housed in the State 
Archives of Tamil Nadu in Madras. The biggest section is formed by the archives of the 
Dutch establishment at Cochin. These are the only archives of a Dutch establishment in 
India which has been preserved relatively intact. There is a press list, a chronological 
shelflist, with remarks concerning some of the documents which are considered important in 
the Dutch records in Madras.7) This list is no more than a primitive instrument. Moreover, 
the original structure of the archives has been lost because of the regrouping according to 
chronology. Nonetheless, it is possible to get a reasonable idea of the original structure. 
Most seventeenth century documents have been lost. The remaining archives consist mainly 
of letters to and from Batavia and the Republic, resoluties, annexes to the resoluties, 
correspondence exchanged with other Dutch establishments, and the diaries of diplomatic 
missions. There are only a very few fragments of the dagregisters of the establishment 
itself. Book-keeping and accounts for the later years are available but not as a complete 
series. There are also a number of documents from the Raad van Justitie and documents 
relating to the local Dutch establishment such as protocollen van civiele akten (protocols of 
civil deeds) and records from the local weeskamer.  
  Only a small portion of the archives of Bengal and Surat, which were transferred from 
Bombay and Calcutta in 1932, are present in Madras. These consist mainly of protocollen 
van civiele akten. Before they were handed over in 1932 the archives were described by J. 
van Kan. It is not certain that the holdings in Calcutta which he described are the same as 
those that were transferred from Calcutta to Madras in 1932.8) The holding described by 
Van Kan is a miscellaneous collection of weeskamer archives, protocollen van civiele akten, 
a few church registers and fragments of administrative and judicial records. The list of the 
holdings transferred in 1932 does not seem to concur with Van Kan's list. 
 The documents from Bengal and Surat are not without interest for prosopographic 
studies of VOC personnel, but for any study of the Company administration one would be 
better advised to consult the papers available in the Netherlands. However, in Madras there 
are some documents concerning the local Dutch establishments in Bengal, Surat and 
Coromandel, inlcuding church registers, and judicial and notarial documents. 
 Furthermore, in the archives of the registrar-general in Madras there are a few church 
registers from Pulicat on the Coromandel coast.9) 
 
 
4. ARCHIVES BROUGHT FROM INDIA IN THE GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
When the Dutch possessions in India were ceded to the English, a number of documents 
remained in Dutch hands.These are mainly resoluties and correspondence with the 
Netherlands and Batavia dating from the last decades of the Company's administration. 
Mixed together with the documents from the Hoge Regering concerning the external 
establishments already mentioned, these were brought to the Netherlands in 1863. When 
an inventory of these was compiled in the General State Archives, the papers concerning 
the establishments in India were removed from the rest and housed in a separate archive, 
the archives of the Voormalige Nederlandse Bezittingen in Voor-Indië. Only documents of 
which there was no shadow of doubt that they had once pertained to archives of Dutch 
establishments in India were included in this. Any dubious cases remained behind among 
the papers of the Hoge Regering.10) 
 
 
5. ARCHIVES IN SRI LANKA 
 
The archives of the Dutch administration of Ceylon have been preserved in a fairly intact 
state. The bulk of these archives is made up of the documents of the administrative bodies 
of the capital Colombo. Only some smaller or larger fragments of the archives of the 
subordinate establishments have survived. The archives of the chief settlement in Colombo 
were described in an inventory compiled in 1943.11) Although not immediately apparent 
from the inventory, once again the archives in Colombo present the picture of typical 
establishment archives based on the correspondence with superiors in the Republic or in 
Batavia, with alongside them the resoluties with annexes and dagregisters of the local 
administration, and archives from the various subordinate establishments. 
 There is a large series of resoluties with annexes of the Governor and Council, with the 
companion series of secret resoluties, and the resoluties from special departments. Besides 
these, there are various series of incoming and outgoing letters (ordinary, secret and from 
the internal and military departments), which are divided up into the categories patria 
(fatherland) and Cape of Good Hope, Batavia, various subordinate establishments, and 
other establishments in the octrooigebied. What is remarkable is the absence of a series of 
dagregisters from Colombo. These must have existed, seeing that parts of them are 
enclosed in the Overgekomen brieven en papieren in the VOC archives in the Netherlands. 
One chapter in the inventory, 'internal affairs', besides including all sorts of series of 
documents referring to particular subjects, also contains protocollen van civiele akten and 
legislation. Another chapter, 'external affairs', not only contains correspondence with other 
VOC establishments (it is not clear why these were not put together with the other 
correspondence), but also includes treaties and correspondence with local authorities and 
representatives of other European powers. As well as the archives of the Governor and 
Council, there are also holdings from the hoofdadministrateur (head of trade) and from the 
dessave (district chief) of Colombo. The archives of the dessave contains a rich collection of 
tombos (sort of cadastral registers). There are also extensive archives of the Raad van 
Justitie relat
ing to both civil and criminal actions, and of lower-ranking legal bodies such as 
the landraad (court of first instance) and the civiele raad. Among the records of temporary 
governmental committees and persons are the archives of the Geheime Commissie (Secret 
Committee responsible for the conduct of the war with Kandy 1762-1766), consisting of 
resoluties and correspondence, and those of a few special committees which were sent from 
the Netherlands.  
 Moreover, besides the state archives ther e are yet other documents of Dutch origin. 
The Wolvendaal Church in Colombo possesses the archives of the Dutch parish there.12) 
 Besides the archives of the ch ief establishment in Colombo, in the State Archives of Sri 
Lanka there are considerable holdings from the subordinate offices at Galle, Matara, Jaffna 
and Wanni. These holdings are particularly important because such subordinate offices had 
fewer direct relations with the central authorities in Batavia and the Republic, so that there 
is less about them to be found in the VOC archives. There is a recent inventory of these 
holdings.13) 
 The Galle archives contain the usual series of resoluties, correspondence with the 
superiors in Colombo, Batavia and the Republic, registers of wills, protocollen van civiele 
akten of the secretaries, appointments registers, reports of diplomatic missions, registers 
containing instructions to local functionaries, dagregisters, auction books and land registers. 
Besides these, there are the archives of separate offices and committees such as those of 
the negotieboekhouder (trade accountant: which actually contains little about book-keeping 
but a lot of administrative documents), of the tombo committee (the main part of which is 
comprised of population lists), and of the school board. There are also large archives from 
the Raad van Justitie in Galle and of the landraad of the Galle district. 
 The archives of the district  of Madurai, then subordinate to Galle now in the Indian 
state of Tamil Nadu, which have been preserved, mainly date from the last period of the 
Company administration. These archives contain both the holdings of the dessave as well as 
that of the landraad. As far as their compostion goes they are similar to the archives of 
Galle. 
 With the exception of a series of tombos, the Jaffna archives contain only a few 
fragments. The same is true for the archives of the district administration of Wanni, only a 
few fragments of which still remain. 
 
 
6. ARCHIVES IN MELAKA 
 
The archives of the Dutch administration in Melaka have been lost. However, a Dutch 
church register has been preserved, transcripts of which are to be found in the General 
State Archives.14) 
 
 
7. ARCHIVES BROUGHT FROM CHINA IN THE GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
The fairly large archives of the Dutch establishment in Canton are in the General State 
Archives, where they arrived in 1863 with the other holdings transferred from Asia. As far 
as their composition is concerned, they are of the same kind as the archives from the other 
establishments: resoluties and dagregisters, incoming and outgoing letters, protocollen van 
civiele akten, and miscellaneous documents. In Canton also the liquidation of the VOC did 
not cause a break in the archives. The documents cover the years up to 1826. There is a 
recent inventory.15) 
 
 
8. ARCHIVES BROUGHT FROM JAPAN IN THE GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
The archives of the Dutch factory in Japan have been very well preserved. They are now in 
the General State Archives. The holding covers the entire VOC period, and continues until 
1860. The structure is the same as that of the archives of the other establishments. For the 
VOC period the archives consist of two sections: the archives of the opperhoofd (head of 
establishment) and council, and those of the pakhuismeester (head of the warehouses), 
book-keeper, and scribe. The latter holding contains protocollen van civiele akten. The 
archives of the opperhoofd and council consists of series of resoluties, dagregisters, letter-
books, and book-keeping. The series of documents referring to book-keeping and trade are 
very intact compared to those from other establishments. Besides this, the archives display 
t
he typical lacunae which occur in many of the archives from establishments: 
correspondence with bodies other than the Governor-General and Council are only available 
in a very incomplete state, and there are only a few scant remains of the correspondence 
with the local authorities. There is a modern inventory of the archives.16) 
 
 
9. ARCHIVES IN CAPE TOWN 
 
The archives in Cape Town are perhaps the best preserved of any administration in the 
octrooigebied. Because the Cape, like Ceylon, was an area where colonists settled, in their 
structure the archives there bear a strong resemblance to those in Colombo. They seem to 
be pretty well organized. The short inventory compiled by Graham Botha gives a good idea 
of the structure.17) The archives of the Dutch administration consist of three separate 
blocks: the archives from the Raad van Politie (the Political Council), those from the Raad 
van Justitie, and those from the weeskamer. When the inventory was compiled in 1918, 
important Dutch collections were still housed in the Hooggerechtshof (High Court), to wit 
the civil rolls of the Raad van Justitie, or in the office of the Surveyor-General (the 
landadministratie or administration of land). 
 The archives of the Raad van Politie are the real government archives. These consist of 
a series of both ordinary and secret resoluties with series of annexes, series of incoming 
and outgoing letters, one series of dagregisters, a series of reports from diplomatic missions 
and expeditions and ship's logs, registers of commissions and instructions, muster-rolls, 
petitions, and various series of protocollen van civiele akten heard before the court. There 
are also a great many other series, most of which are characterized by either greater or 
smaller lacunae. The archives of the Raad van Politie also contain a number of 
miscellaneous volumes and documents concerning other establishments in the 
octrooigebied. Very little to do with the book-keeping has survived. A few miscellaneous 
remnants from the archives of other bodies have been added to the archives of the Raad 
van Politie. 
 The archives of the Raad van Jusititie are very large. However, a number of the series 
contain fairly considerable gaps. The orphanage archives are also extensive. 
 
 
10. PRIVATE ARCHIVES 
 
Private archives often include great quantities of official documents or collections of 
professional documents.18) Archives of officials like the Brugman Collection contain the ex 
officio correspondence and other documents relating to the work of the person who formed 
the archives, whereas the collections of documents originate from documentation collected 
as background material by VOC officials. 
 The documents of VOC employees in Asia, which are found in family archives, are 
usually typical batches of official documents. In contrast, the archives of the directors which 
were formed in the Netherland, such as that of the Radermacher family, are typical 
collections of documentation to which the directors could refer for decisions affecting their 
policy. The smaller collections of documents often contain both a few official documents 
such as letters of appointment as well as other personal documents, which have been 
preserved more for their curiosity value or as memorabilia. 
 One interesting aspect of archives of officials in private archives collections is that they 
often present a picture that is only incompletely reflected in the archives of the VOC and its 
establishments. Some archives of employees show that, in reality, there was a much 
greater and more varied correspondence carried on than appears from the documents in the 
official VOC archives. Typical examples of these are the archives of Wollebrand Geleynssen 
de Jongh about Persia and Surat and of Vernet about Bengal. 
 
I. In the General State Archives 
 
The most important archives of functionaries are: 
-Alting, W.A. (1724-1800), 1596-1796 (Governor-General) and Engelhard, N. (1761-1831), 
seventeenth century-1831 (various functions in Java) (partly in the Tweede Afdeling in 
the family archives Van Alphen and Engelhard);19) 
-Brugmans, P.A. and A., 1612-1870 (advocate of the Amsterdam Chamber; master of the 
equipage in Batavia);20) 
-Cnoll, Govert (1644-1710), 1678-1709 (various functions in Java);21) 
-Geleynssen de Jongh, Wollebrand (1594-1674), 1612-1648 (director in Surat and 
Persia);22) 
-Kal, Jacob van (1754-1829), 1781-1811 (various functions in Melaka,  Riau 
and Batavia;23) 
-Nederburgh, S.C. (1762-1811) (advocate and commissaris-generaal) and family, 
eighteenth-twentieth century;24) 
-Sweers, Salomon; Jeremias van Vliet; Jacques Specx; and François Mannis, seventeenth 
century (many functions);25) 
-Vernet, G.L., 1746-1766 (director in Bengal);26) 
-Wttewaal, Jan, and Hendrik van Staveren, 1754-1888 (VOC employees in Celebes and 
Sumatra).27) 
 
Collections of documentation of directors and advocates: 
-Stadhouderlijke secretarie (Sectretariat of the Stadhouder, 1747-1795;28) 
-Ghesel, Jacob van (1707-1773), 1638-1773 (advocate);29) 
-Groot, Hugo de (1538-1645), seventeenth century (advocate of the Amsterdam 
Chamber);30) 
-Hope, Thomas (1704-1779) and Jean, 1602-1784 (director);31) 
-Hudde, Johannes (1628-1704), 1602-1703 (director);32) 
-Meerman van der Goes, Daniël Adriaan (advocate) (1748-1805), 1755-1795; 33) 
-Radermacher, family, 1595-1800 (directors);34) 
-Sweers, Specx, Van Vliet and Mannis, (directors) seventeenth century;35 
-Vredenburch, Adriaan (1680-1759) and Gerard (1710-1784) van, 1647-1766 (directors of 
the Delft Chamber).36) 
 
Memorabilia of families: 
-Goens, family Van, seventeenth to nineteenth century (Governor-General, Governors of 
Ceylon et al.);37) 
-Hoorn and Van Riebeeck, families Van, seventeenth-eighteenth century (Governors-
General);38) 
-Polanen, Rogier Gerard van (1757-1833) (clerk to the Raad van Jusititie).39) 
 
II. Elsewhere 
 
Archives of functionaries: 
Gijsels, Artus, (various functions in the Indonesian Archipelago) in the Badische 
Landesbibliothek in Karlsruhe;40) 
Hoorn, J. van (Governor-General), in the Leiden University Library. 
 
Directors' archives; 
Van der Poorten, Josua, and Philip van der Ghiessen, 1750-1751 (representatives of the 
Stadhouder), in the Amsterdam Municipal Archives. 
 
Family memorabilia: 
Boudaen, Jan (director of the Amsterdam Chamber) and Pieter Nuyts (Governor of Taiwan), 
in the Huydecoper family archives in the State Archives of Utrecht. 
 
 
11. COLLECTION AANWINSTEN (ACQUISITIONS) IN THE FIRST SECTION OF THE 
GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
In the first place, the collection Aanwinsten in the First Section contains all sorts of 
miscellaneous documents which somebody at some time has thought interesting and have 
therefore been preserved. Besides these, there are both semi-private papers of people 
referring to the VOC as well as miscellaneous documents which formally speaking should 
belong in the VOC archives or in those of an establishment, but were kept aside by a 
director or an employee. Naturally these are often interesting and important documents. 
Furthermore, the collection contains a number of largish fragments of archives of VOC 
employees, of the same type as the fragments of archives of functionaries which one comes 
across in private archives. Meanwhile, some documents have been taken out of the 
collection and inventories have been made of them as separate archives. Examples of this 
are the collections of the Governors of Ceylon Hendrik Becker and Lubbert Jan van Eck.41) 
The following collections are still to be found in the collection Acquisitions, sometimes fairly 
scattered throughout the collection: 
Documents of J.W. Falck (master of the equipage in Surat); 
Documents of C. Chastelain (Governor of the Cape of Good Hope); 
Documents of Hendrik Breton (Director-General in Batavia); 
Documents of I.A. Rumpf (Governor of Ceylon); 
Documents of A.E. van Braam Houckgeest (ambassador to China); 
Documents of J.G. Loten (Governor of Ceylon). In the nineteenth century the extensive Van 
Loten archives fell into the hands of autograph collectors and, consequently have been 
scattered among various archive holdings. Besides the part in the collection Acquisitions, 
there are parts to be found in the Grothe van Schellach Collection in the Utrecht Municipal 
Archives and in the library of the Faculty of Theology of the University of Tilburg. 
 
Notes 
 
1. J.A. van der Chijs, Inventaris van 's Lands Archief te Batavia (1602-1816
) (Batavia 
1882). 
 
2. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, Beschrijving van een collectie stukken, in 1862-63 uit Batavia 
naar Nederland verzonden, voornamelijk het bestuur der Hooge Regeering over de 
buitenkantoren betreffende, 1602-1827) (typescript; n.p. ['s-Gravenhage] n.d.). 
 
3. Inventaris van de archieven van de weeskamer Batavia/boekhouder-generaal te 
Batavia/schepenbank te Batavia (typescript; 's-Gravenhage 1980). 
 
4. Ibidem. 
 
5. Ibidem. 
 
6. J. van Kan, Compagniebescheiden en aanverwante archivalia in Britsch-Indië en op 
Ceylon (Batavia 1931) 19-23. 
 
7. A.J.M. Heyligers, Press List of Ancient Dutch Records from 1657 to 1825
 (n.p. n.d.) 
 
8. An abbreviated list of this is Supplementary Catalogue of Dutch Records
 (Madras 1952). 
The documents from Surat which have been included in this are described more fully in Van 
Kan, Compagniesbescheiden
, 78-105. See for the documents concerning Bengal: ibidem, 
59-74. 
 
9. Van Kan, Compagniebescheiden
, 198-199. 
 
10. W.J.M. Buch, Inventaris van bescheiden der voormalige Nederlandsche bezittingen in 
Voor-Indië (typescript; 's-Gravenhage 1936) 
 
11. M.W. Jurriaanse, Catalogue of the Archives of the Dutch Central Government of Coastal 
Ceylon 1640-1796 (Colombo 1943). 
 
12. J. van Kan, Compagniebescheiden
, 222-228. 
 
13. M.E. van Opstall ed., Inventory of the Archives of the Dutch Government in the 
Divisions of Galle (Matara) and Jaffnapatanam 1640-1796 by S.A.W. Mottau. With a List of 
Reconstructed 17th century Tombos by J.S. Wigboldus and Addneda to the Catalogue of the 
Archives of the Dutch Central Government of Coastal Ceylon (The Hague 1975). 
 
14. Collection Aanwinsten Eerste Afdeling, inv. nr. 1920 XXXIV 1. 
 
15. Julianti L. Parani, Inventaris van het archief van de Nederlandse factorij te Canton 
1742-1826 (typescript; 's-Gravenhage 1972). 
 
16. M.P.H. Roessingh, Het archief van de Nederlandse factorij in Japan/The archive of the 
Dutch factory in Japan 1609-1860 (typescript; 's-Gravenhage 1964). 
 
17. Graham Botha, A Brief Guide to the Various Classes of Documents in the Cape Archives 
for the Period 1652-1806 (Cape Town 1918). 
 
18. A survey is given in M.P.H. Roessingh ed., Sources of the History of Asia and Oceania in 
the Netherlands I. Sources up to 1796 (München 1982). See also J.A.M.Y. Bos Rops et al. 
eds., De archieven in het Algemeen Rijksarchief. Surveys of the archives and collections in 
public archives depositories in the Netherlands 9 (Alphen aan de Rijn 1982). 
 
19. Inventories: Verslagen omtrent 's Rijks Oude Archieven
 (hereafter: VROA) 23 (1900) 
29-57; VROA 19 (1896) 112; J. de Hullu, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken, 
afkomstig van Nicolaus Engelhard', VROA 42 (1919) II, 347-366. 
 
20. Inventory: J. de Hullu, "Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken, voor het meerendeel 
afkomstig van mr. Pibo Anthony Brugmans en van diens zoon mr. Anthonius Brugmans', 
VROA
 42 (1919) II, 347-366. 
 
21. Inventory: H.A. Trapman, 'Inventaris van het archief van Govert Cnoll (1644-1710)' in: 
Vijf ambtenaren van de VOC en de regering in Indië. Inventories of the Becker, Cnoll, Van 
Kal, Van Polanen and Valckenier archives (typescript; 's-Gravnehage 1985) 27-54. An 
earlier inventory had appeared in VROA
 24 (1901) 38-41. 
 
22. Inventory: J. de Hullu, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken, afkomstig van 
Wollebrand Geleynssen de Jongh', VROA
 35 (1912) 94-135; VROA 36 (1913) I, 96-104. 
 
23. Inventory: Theo Thomassen, 'Inventory van het archief van Jacob van Kal (1754-1829)' 
in: Vijf ambtenaren, 55-85. 
 
24. Inventory: R. de Vries and M.E. van Opstall, Inventaris van het archief S.C. 
Nederburgh/Inventaris van het familiearchief Nederburgh (typescript; 's-Gravnehage 1987). 
 
25. Inventory: R. Bijlsma, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken van Salomon Sweers, 
Jeremias van Vliet, Jacques Specx en François Mannis, gemerkt C.S.', Inventarissen van 
rijks-en andere archieven van rijkswege uitgegeven, voor zoover zij niet afzonderlijk zijn 
afgedrukt (hereafter: IRA) I (1928) 3-37. 
 
26. Inventory: Vernet Collection (tyescript; n.p. n.y.). 
 
27. Inventory: J. de Hullu, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken afkomstig van Jan 
Wttewaal en Hendrik van Staveren', VROA
 42 (1919) I, 195-204. 
 
28. Inventory: [Stadhouderlijke Secretarie, 1747-1795] (2 volumes; typescript; n.p. n.y.) 
 
29. Inventory: Beschrijving van een collectie papieren, afkomstig van Mr. Jacob van Ghesel, 
bewindhebber van de Vereeningde Oost-Indische Compagnie ter kamer Amsterdam van 
1757 tot 1773 (typescript; n.p. n.y.) 
 
 
30. Inventories: VROA
 34 (1911) 64-68 and W.E. Smelt, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling 
papieren, afkomstig van Hugo de Groot', IRA 1 (1928) 73-105. 
 
31. Inventory; Verzameling Hope (manuscript; n.p. n.y.). Part of the archives of Thomas 
Hope can be found in the J.C. Baud archives in the Second Section of the General State 
Archives; inventory: J. de Hullu, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken afkomstig van 
Jean Chretien baron Baud', VROA
 40 (1917) I, 497-621. 
 
32. Inventory: V.I. van de Wall, 'Beschrijving eener verzameling stukken afkomstig van 
Johannes Hudde', VROA
 49 (1926) I, 225-232. 
 
33. Inventory: Soemartini, Het archief Meerman van der Goes (typescript; 's-Gravenhage 
1968). 
 
34. Inventory: M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, Inventaris archief Radermacher (typescript; n.p. 
n.y.) 
 
35. See Note 26.  
 
36. Part of the documents of Adriaan and Gerard van Vredenburch is included in the VOC 
archives of the Delft Chamber (inv. nrs. 13868-13875). Another part is in the collection 
Aanwinsten van de Eerste Afdeling (handwritten inventory) and in the State Archives in 
Zuid-Holland. 
 
37. Inventory: A.E.M. Ribberink, Inventaris familiepapieren Van Goens (typescript; n.p. 
1960). 
 
38. Inventory: Collectie Van Hoorn-Van Riebeeck (typescript; n.p. n.y.). 
 
39. Inventory: W.D. Post, 'Inventaris van het archief van Rogier Gerard van Polanen (1757-
1833)' in : Vijf ambtenaren, 87-158. 
 
40. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, 'The Private papers of Artus Gijsels as a Source for the History 
of East Asia', Journal of Southeast Asian History
 10 (1969) 540-559. 
 
41. Inventories: Y.M. Sitompul, 'Inventaris van het archief van Hendrik Becker (1661-1722)' 
in: Vijf ambtenaren, 11-24; Albert Vrugt, Inventaris van het archief van Lubbert Jan, baron 
van Eck (1719-1765) (Den Haag 1991).  
CHAPTER 5.  VOC MAPS AND DRAWINGS 
 
C.J. Zandvliet 
 
 
The bulk of the maps and drawings of the VOC which are now in the General State Archives 
originally belonged to the archives of the Heren XVII
 (board of directors) and the Amsterdam 
Chamber. Smaller but by no means insignificant sections originally pertained to the other 
chambers, especially that of Zeeland. The Amsterdam Chamber had the lion's share of VOC 
operations. The administration of the navigation as well as the knowledge of overseas 
topography and property were concentrated there. The directors received maps and drawings 
of places and regions in the octrooigebied (area under charter to the Company) either from or 
via Batavia, and sometimes directly from the subordinate establishments themselves. The 
maps and drawings sent back like this make up the main component of the maps and drawings 
archives of the VOC. Besides these, many maps were also made in the Republic itself, 
especially the charts which were produced in Amsterdam and elsewhere for the outward bound 
ships. 
 
 
1. THE MAKING OF MAPS AND DRAWINGS 
 
Suppliers of charts 
Reliable cartographic information was needed both for the voyage to and trade within Asia 
when the VOC was established in 1602. By the end of the sixteenth century the Republic 
already had access to navigational information from Portuguese sources. This had been made 
public through the publications of several Dutch travellers and scientists like Dirck Gerritz. 
Pomp, alias Dik China, and Jan Huygen van Linschoten. The work of Van Linschoten in 
particular includes maps and other illustrations, in combination with descriptions of routes and 
of landfalls. Besides this, Petrus Plancius edited the hand-drawn charts of the Portuguese 
Bartolomeo de Lasso, wrote several memoranda with navigational directions and instructed 
stuurlieden (navigation officers) for the voyages on the high seas. 
 When the VOC ships were fitted out in th e Republic, the stuurlieden and the captains 
were supplied with stuurmansgereedschappen (navigational instruments), such as compasses, 
signal flags, quadrants and charts. Each chamber of the Company had an equipagemeester 
(master of the equipage) responsible for the fitting out of the ships which were to sail to Asia. 
Charts were drawn or bought under his direction. As with other equipment pertaining to the 
equipage, the charts were obtained from a limited number of suppliers. In the harbour cities of 
the Republic there were several mapmakers who had specialized in the making of parchment 
charts. Private shipowners and captains placed orders with them, as did the VOC after 1602. 
Augustijn Robaert of Amsterdam was a prominent supplier of hand-drawn charts, who included 
the VOC among his clients.1) Very few of the charts which were used on the VOC ships in the 
initial years have survived. 
 In 1617 there was a change in the way in whi ch cartographic information was procured, 
when the Heren XVII
 appointed Hessel Gerritz. as their exclusive mapmaker. It was his task to 
provide charts for all ships of the VOC which sailed from the Republic, including those from 
chambers other than Amsterdam. The appointment of purveyor of charts to the VOC, 
commissioned and furnished with an instruction, continued until 1795. The mapmakers 
engaged in this task were respectively: 
 
1617 - 1632  Hessel Gerritz. 
1633 - 1705 The Blaeu Family (who were also examinators van de stuurlieden 
or examinors of the navigating officers)2) 
1705 - 1743  Isaac de Graaff 
1743 - 1795  The Van Keulen Family3) 
 
Throughout the period 1617-1795 the position of the mapmakers had an ambivalent character. 
Their situation was different to that of most of the other VOC employees. They worked from 
home and did not receive a salary but were paid on a piece-work basis for the charts they 
supplied.4) Moreover, the official mapmakers could contract out the drawing of the charts to 
other, independently established, draftsmen.5) Nor was the VOC the mapmakers' only source 
of income. With the possible exception of De Graaff, besides producing hand-drawn charts for 
the VOC, they offered engraved and hand-drawn charts on the open market. This latter factor 
is the most important difference with the position of, for instance, the shipbuilder and the 
examinator van de stuurlieden, who, during the eighteenth century, were forbidden to be in 
receipt of any income other than that from the VOC.6) The position of the VOC mapmaker lay 
between that of his Spanish and Portuguese colleagues (salaried mapmakers/government 
officials) and of his English colleagues (independent suppliers).7)  
 The VOC undertook to make use of the services  of the official mapmaker for more of less 
fixed prices. In the production and management of the charts the mapmaker was subject to 
the supervision of the directors or of their deputies. Furthermore, just as other Company 
employees, he was sworn to secrecy. However, in practice, the mapmaker to the VOC carried 
out the production and correction of charts fairly independently. The obligation to secrecy was 
at odds with his production for the free market.8)  
 In accordance with their conditions of appo intment captains and stuurlieden were obliged to 
use Company charts. It was also their professional duty to make notes and sketches of 
unknown coasts, reefs and other relevant features.9) Returning captains and stuurlieden 
handed over the charts they had used and corrected, and the logs they had kept, to the 
mapmaker so that he could use these to correct maps and seaman's guides. The mapmaker in 
Amsterdam undertook this work in collaboration with the examinator van de stuurlieden. 
During the eighteenth century the mapmaker's activities increasingly fell under the supervision 
of the examinator van de stuurlieden10) 
 In order to ensure the durability the charts, the VOC had them drawn on parchment. The 
way in which they were produced was simple: a model, which was called a legger (templet), 
was used repeatedly for the making of new charts.11) The coastlines were pricked out at 
regular intervals with a needle on the model chart. When a new chart was made, the model 
map was laid on top of a blank sheet of parchment, and the coastlines on the model chart were 
then strewn from a small bag of soot. The soot which percolated through the holes in the 
model then yielded a pattern of dots on the blank sheet. Once the model map had been 
carefully removed from the parchment, the coastlines coud be drawn in by joining up the 
specks of soot. When this had been done, the new map was ready in outline.12) 
 Although there had been talk of the printing of a seaman's guide about 1655 and of the 
printing of loose charts in 1684, it was 1753 and about 1775 respectively before this was 
achieved. At this point it should be mentioned that in a certain sense the seaman's guide the 
English Pilot Third Book by John Thornton, printed in 1703, can be considered to be a VOC 
seaman's guide avant-la-lettre. This rutter for the Asian trade, containing thirty-five charts, 
was compiled with the help of VOC charts.13) 
 The mapmaker was not only responsible for the production and supervision of charts. On the 
basis of his geographical expertise, he was probably asked for advice during the fitting out of 
expeditions. In the course of the eighteenth century, the role of examinator van de stuurlieden 
grew steadily in the field of supervision and advice. 
 
The firm of Van Keulen 
Johannes van Keulen was appointed mapmaker to the VOC in 1743. The firm was to retain its 
position as mapmaker until the liquidation of the Company. Even before 1743, the firm of Van 
Keulen had supplied the VOC with navigational instruments and maps: since1728 seaman's 
guides had been regularly purchased there as part of the equipage.14) From the beginning of 
the eighteenth century the firm of Van Keulen had possessed hand-drawn, large-scale maps of 
the VOC area from which hand-drawn copies were supplied.15) However, there are no 
indications that copies were ever produced from these models at the behest of or at the 
expense of the VOC. It is possible that the VOC captains and stuurlieden undertook this at their 
own expense. 
 No business archives of any of the mapmak ers from before the Van Keulen era have 
survived. It is possible that some of the archives of its predecessors were absorbed into Van 
Keulen archives. When the firm was liquidated in 1885, the archives of the business was 
auctioned off. Parts of them can be traced (See Section 5). 
 
Mapbooks 
At the request of either the Heren XVII
 or of the Amsterdam Chamber, and indeed sometimes 
on their own initiative, the mapmakers in Amsterdam compiled mapbooks or series of maps of 
the octrooigebied from time to time. These deserve a separate mention because many maps 
and drawings are now only found as copies in these mapbooks or map series. It can be 
assumed that this copying was an important factor in the loss of the originals: once they had 
been copied the information was readily available in a manageable and uniform package. The 
following are only works which cover the whole of the octrooigebied : 
 
1622  Mapbook of Hessel Gerritsz.  
1660-1670 Atlas of Johan Vingboons and Joan Blaeu 
ca. 1670  Atlas of Laurens van der Hem16) 
ca. 1695  Mapbook of Isaac de Graaff, known as 'Atlas Amsterdam'17) 
[1703  English Pilot Third Book] 
1715-1726 Chart Series Gerard van Keulen18) 
1753  Seaman's Guide Johannes va n Keulen and Jan de Marre19) 
 
The status of the publications mentioned above differs. The works of Gerritsz., De Graaff and 
Van Keulen were produced on the orders of the VOC. The atlases of Vingboons/Blaeu and Van 
der Hem/Blaeu admittedly did have some connection with the VOC -in the 1760s there had 
been some discussion within the VOC about the compilation of a printed seaman's guide- but 
they stand as it were with one foot in the VOC camp and the other foot in the free market. The 
series of manuscript charts of Gerard van Keulen have even less connection with the VOC, but 
probably a record made by a VOC captain or stuurman (navigating officer)served as the model 
for a number of his maps. Unfortunately the work of Hessel Gerritsz. has been lost. The 
publication of Van Keulen and the examinator van de stuurlieden, De Marre, was only intended 
for use on the Company's ships, and was therefore more limited in its scope. 
 The mapbook of Isaac de Graaff, which was co mpiled at the end of the seventeenth century, 
occupies a special place because it offers a great variety of cartographic material: both large 
and small-scale maps of land areas; charts; and plans and views from throughout the whole of 
the octrooigebied. The duplicate maps in this work date back to 1602. This so -called Atlas 
Amsterdam was taken apart in the nineteenth century and dispersed throughout the collection 
of foreign maps (VEL) in the General State Archives. De Graaff's mapbook can be seen as the 
companion to Pieter van Dam's Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie (Description of 
the East India Company). Throughout the whole of the eighteenth century this mapbook was 
the principal source of cartographic information for the directors. 
 
Supervision of buildings and premises in the Republic 
In the Republic the VOC was the proprietor of premises which included premises such as 
warehouses, shipyards, office buildings and ropewalks. However, the number of drawings of 
these in the General State Archives is very small. Many drawings have probably succumbed to 
wear and tear or were thrown away after use. Others have been abstracted from the archives 
and found their way into private collections. Moreover, the services of the stadsfabriek 
(municipal architect) were often called upon for the production of the drawings. Therefore the 
collection policy in the nineteenth and twentiethth centuries is also a reason that what little that 
has been preserved of the plans and drawings of property in the Republic is now mainly to be 
found in municipal archives services or in museums. 
 After the liquidation of the VOC its premises and buildings passed into the hands of the 
state. This explains why maps and drawings from after 1799 are available in the General State 
Archives among the (drawings) archives of various government departments. 
 
Ship plans and models 
Some parts of the Company's archives have been almost completely lost. This is also true of 
the archives of ship plans and models from the shipyard. The ship plans were an aid to the 
development and building of the VOC ships. In 1742, for instance, when a new plan was being 
developed for a new type of VOC ship, the final decision was taken on the basis of plans and 
models.20) 
 There are only a few surviving drawings, whi ch have been dispersed throughout various 
collections in the Netherlands. The loss and dispersion can be explained by the changes in 
types of ship and the shift to private trade after 1795. These made the plans and models of 
VOC ships obsolete: either they ended up in the rubbish bin or, by happy chance, in a museum. 
For research into shipbuilding, apart from material sources and a few plans, the investigator is 
mainly dependent on the written archives. 
 
The Smaller Chambers 
 At the beginning of the seventeenth centur y, the VOC chambers, other than Amsterdam, 
purchased charts from various suppliers.21) Augustijn Robaert, who had established himself in 
Amsterdam, succeeded in attracting an important share in the supply of charts both to the 
Amsterdam Chamber and to the other chambers as well.22) The appointment of Hessel 
Gerritsz. introduced structural changes. In principle, all ships were supposed to use only those 
charts which had been supplied by the mapmaker to the Amsterdam Chamber. This stipulation 
was reiterated in the course of the years.23) 
 Nonetheless, several chambers  continued to procure charts from local suppliers. In 1669 it 
was reported in the Haags Besogne (preparatory meeting of theHeren XVII
 in August) that the 
Hoorn Chamber and the Zeeland Chamber commissioned their charts locally.24) Although it 
was pointed out in 1669 that the production of charts was the prerogative of the mapmaker in 
Amsterdam, the Zeeland Chamber continued to take their business to the local mapmakers 
Joost van Breen and Arent Roggeveen. Eventually, people grew resigned to the situation. In 
1684 when a discussion blew up about the quality of the charts, the Zeeland Chamber were not 
even reminded that they were expected to make use of the services of the Amsterdam 
mapmaker.25) Even during the eighteenth century it was still their practice to call upon local 
mapmakers.26) 
 
Batavia and the subordinate establishments 
At one time or another, many of the maps now in the General State Archives were forwarded 
to the Republic from establishments in Asia. One of the reasons that the The Hague collection is 
so important is that so many of the maps and drawings of the local administrations in the 
establishment archives themselves have disappeared. 
 The Governor-General and Council in Batavia were the information repository for the 
subordinate establishments. Part of this information consisted of maps and drawings. In the 
subordinate establishments there were either permanent (for example, the Cape of Good Hope 
and Ceylon) or temporary military engineers, fabrieken (architects), surveyors and 
mapmakers, who were employed in the administration of land, the building of roads and 
waterways, architecture and fortifications. 
 The following remarks concern the organization and administration in Batavia. In part, they 
are also relevant to the subordinate establishments. 
 Initially, the territory of the VOC in Java was extremely restricted; it was virtually limited to 
the city of Batavia. Under such circumstances it was sufficient to employ an engineer who 
worked both as surveyor and architect, in the latter function both on civil works (usually called 
fabriek ) and on fortifications (usually called ingenieur). In 1627 a surveyor and a rooimeester 
(clerk of works) were appointed under the authority of the aldermen of Batavia. The clerk of 
works carried out checks to see that the building regulations were observed in the city. One of 
the consequences of the expansion of the urban area in 1664 was that a college van 
heemraden (drainage board) was appointed (comparable to a polder board in the Republic), 
which was responsible for the management of land outside the city, including supervision of 
boundaries. When this board was reorganized in 1679-1680, it was decided to make a 
cadastral map.27) The board was given permission to appoint surveyors for this task. 
 Therefore, in the late seve nteenth and during the eighteenth century, surveyors worked 
under the authority of both the aldermen and the college van heemraden. As far as registration 
is concerned, the divided administration of the real estate inside and outside the city was 
brought to an end in 1778, the year in which the landmeterscomptoir (surveyor's office) was 
made responsible for the supervision and updating of all maps.  
 The stadslandmeter (municipal surveyor), who fell under the jurisdiction of the aldermen, 
was under the direct authority of the fabriek. Thefabriek was in charge of the ambachtquartier 
(craftsmen's quarter). He was responsible for the supervision of the Company buildings and 
their contents; in principle with the exception of goods to do with the fleet, which were in the 
charge of the equipagemeester. Many surveyors made their careers by rising to the rank of 
fabriek. The fabriek was also involved in the supervision, design and building of military 
engineering works. 
 From the beginning of the seventeenth century onwards there are references to military 
engineers in the service of the VOC in the East. They were mainly employed for siegeworks and 
the building of new forts. However, in the seventeenth century, their presence was less 
permanent than that of the surveyors and fabrieken . The latter were then still mainly 
responsible for the maintenance and supervision of forts and buildings. As the need arose 
gunners, or an engineer who was attached to the artillery, served with thefabriek as architects 
for military engineering works.28) 
 This situation changed in 1717 when the Heren XVII
 sent a director of fortifications and two 
assistant engineers to Asia. This was, however, a temporary measure. It was only in the 
second half of the eighteenth century that the position of the fabriek was gradually 
undermined. As was also the case in the Republic, the architects and surveyors were either 
partially elbowed out or replaced entirely by military engineers. In 1793 this trend was 
confirmed in Batavia by the appointment of a military engineer to the post of director of 
fortifications, buildings and waterworks. A director of fortifications and artillery had already 
been appointed in the Cape of Good Hope in 1778. The new director in Batavia was put in 
charge of the management of the entire archives of maps and drawings. All the engineers and 
surveyors employed by the Company in the East were under his authority. 
 Not only maps of land areas were produced in  Batavia but charts as well. Although it was 
the task of the mapmaker in Amsterdam to provide all ships with charts, the necessity for 
having a mapmaker in Batavia for the shipping in Asian waters made itself felt. In contrast to 
the situation in Amsterdam, right from the outset the mapmaking in Batavia was completely 
under the authority of the VOC; the mapmakers worked exclusively for the Company. There 
was a chart office in the shipyard in Batavia. The baaskaartenmaker (master mapmaker) 
worked there under the aegis of the equipagemeester. Besides producing maps, just as his 
Amsterdam colleague the mapmaker was involved in the compilation and the keeping up to 
date of the seaman's guides, in consultation with the equipagemeester and his assistants (ex-
captains or retired stuurlieden). 
 Until about half way through the eighteenth ce ntury, an ever-growing number of assistants 
worked under the master mapmaker. They copied leggerkaarten (model maps) which had been 
improved and corrected on the basis of information supplied by captains and stuurlieden.. We 
should not hold too exaggerated an opinion of these cartographers. The production of a map, 
at least as far as the assistants were concerned, demanded nothing more than tracing and 
copying. 
 After the practice of the engraving of charts instead of drawing them by hand increased, the 
Hydrografisch Bureau (Office of Hydrography) in Batavia declined in importance and it was 
decided to streamline it. Just as it had once been the fate of thefabriek, now it was the turn of 
the traditional master mapmaker to be displaced, in his case by a naval officer. The order 
issued to the examinator van de stuurlieden and instructor, P.H. Ohdem, in 1753, to supervise 
the master mapmaker and the quality of the charts, is the first sign of a change in attitude to 
the mapmakers' office.29) The importance of the office in Batavia was diminished even more a 
few decades later as the result of the hydrographic activities of the naval school in Semarang 
(1782-1812). After 1782 all hydrographic mapping in Asia was carried out by teachers and 
pupils of the naval school. 
 
 
2. MANAGEMENT OF THE ARCHIVES OF MAPS AND DRAWINGS  
 
During the Company period (1602-1795) 
A central archives for the maps and drawings of the VOC in the Republic was never established. 
Each chamber possessed its own collection. Seeing that the Amsterdam Chamber had the 
greatest share in the Company's operations, and that it for the greater part of the time was the 
administrative seat of the Heren XVII
, the most important collections of maps and drawings 
were formed in Amsterdam.  
 In order to facilitate decision-making and for the convenience of the administration, the 
maps and drawings of the Amsterdam Chamber were on hand either actually in or in the 
immediate vicinity of the boardroom. Framed maps hung on the walls of the boardroom of the 
Oostindisch Huis in the Hoogstraat.30) Besides these wall-maps, after 1622 the mapbook of 
Hessel Gerritsz. also became available. After ca. 1695, the mapbook of the clerk and 
mapmaker Isaac de Graaff was also on hand, as were several atlases and other printed 
geographical works. 
 From an extract of the Company advocate, E. Sc ott, it appears that the directors had several 
specific finding aids to maps and drawings. The first finding aid provided directions to the the 
maps and drawings which had been bound in with the series Overgekomen brieven en papieren 
(letters and papers received from Asia). A second finding aid describes the kaarten die niet 
ingebonden sijn (maps that are not bound).31) Both series of maps and drawings were 
probably kept in the charterkamer (records room) of the Oostindisch Huis, in the care of the 
librarian. 
 In the seventeenth century the ships' logs we re also stored in the Oostindisch Huis.32) 
Theleggerkaarten were kept at the mapmaker's; he, of course, worked at home. It is likely that 
at least one copy of every type of chart was kept in thestuurmanskamer (navigation room) in 
the Oostindisch Huis as a model.33) It was here that all the logs and corrected charts handed 
in by the return ships were kept until the end of the eighteenth century. The stuurmanskamer 
was placed under the supervision of a book-keeper, who in turn was responsible to the 
examinator van de stuurlieden. The mapmaker had access to the stuurmanskamer where he 
could borrow maps and logs which, after signing a receipt, he could take home for a while so 
that he could make corrections to the leggerkaarten and to the seaman's guides. 
 Therefore, there were two places where charts were to be found as archivalia: firstly at the 
home of the mapmaker, consisting mainly of the leggerkaarten and cartographic material 
supplied by captains and stuurlieden; and secondly in the stuurmanskamer in the Oostindisch 
Huis, consisting of logs and cartographic material from ships which had returned, and 
prototypes of the various charts. 
 All sorts of equipment needed for the outfitti ng of outward-bound ships was stored in the 
Oostindisch Huis, in the warehouses and at the shipyard. This included maps and navigational 
instruments. The outfitting of the ships was carried out on the basis of checklists which were 
regularly updated. They record the numbers and types of charts to be supplied per ship, with a 
note of their book value.34) These charts cannot be considered as cartographic archivalia of 
the Company. They are only mentioned here because in part their administration ran parallel to 
the holdings mentioned above and because remnants from these supplies have probably been 
preserved in the present collections (the so-called duplicates). 
 The supply of charts was produced by the ma pmaker. In the seventeenth century it is not 
clear whether he delivered his charts directly to the ships or to the equipagemeester, or 
whether the maps were always taken first to the Oostindisch Huis. From the instructions of 
Joan Blaeu in 1638 it is clear that there was space in the Oostindisch Huis for the storage of 
charts.35) It was one of the duties of the mapmaker to provide a regular inventory/stocklist of 
them.36) 
 In the eighteenth century at least part of the stock was housed in the stuurmanskamer and 
also perhaps in a warehouse, and probably another part was to be found in the workplace or 
the shop of the mapmaker.37) It is likely that the used charts, which had been handed in by 
captains and stuurlieden on their return, were kept in stock by the Company to be used for the 
next equipage. Presumably, the newly produced charts were kept at home by the mapmaker; 
then they were then delivered to the Company for each equipage on more or less fixed 
dates.38) 
 In general terms the procedure in the Am sterdam Chamber was the same in the other 
chambers. Boardrooms were furnished with framed maps and prints for the use of the directors 
and representation. The directors also had geographical works and atlases at their disposal.39) 
At the end of the eighteenth century the Zeeland Chamber kept a separate register of the 
maps and drawings which had been received from establishments in Asia.40) The chambers 
formed their own collections of charts, which were provided by their own suppliers and 
mapmakers, or which had been handed in by captains and stuurlieden upon their return home. 
These charts from the stocks were used again for the outfitting of ships due to sail. 
 
The Batavian and French periods (1796-1813) 
In 1796 the stuurmanskamer in Amsterdam contained a supply of charts which were still in use 
and an archives of both hand-drawn and printed maps and seaman's guides. At this time it was 
still under the supervision of theexaminator van de stuurlieden. When he resigned in 1796, 
because 'the books, charts and instruments pertaining to the navigation office are so 
voluminous', his successor was authorized by the Oostindisch Comité (East India Committee) 
to take over only the most valuable. The remainder were handed over to the second 
examinator, Engelberts.41) By valuable charts the Committee probably meant the charts that 
could still be used as part of the equipage: recent charts. 
 A second holding -of maps and charts, plans and mapbooks- made up part of the collection 
in the charterkamer in the Oostindisch Huis. In 1800 the archivist there was given instructions 
to keep the '... atlases, loose maps and drawings now available or those that the council might 
acquire from time to time...in a separate cupboard ...', with the exception of the charts, which 
were in fact 'stored in what is known as the stuurmanskamer'.42) In the period 1800-1806 this 
separate collection was indeed assembled in the charterkamer and described.43) 
 The national administ rative changes that came into force after 1806 had repercussions for 
the internal structure of the holdings of maps and drawings of the VOC. In all the 
inventorizations which have taken place since then, it has always been the exception rather 
than the rule that the maps and drawings have been directly associated with the written 
archive material. Even though in most instances the maps and drawings were either put in 
order or handed over at the same time as the written material.44) 
 In 1806 the administration of the colonies was centralized. By Royal Decree of the 18th July, 
1806, a Depot-Generaal van Oorlog (General Depot for War), on the French model, was set up 
by King Louis Napoleon. The task of this depot was to take charge of the maps and drawings 
pertaining to the realm, the making of maps, and the compilation of reports relevant to policy 
and historiography. A great deal of attention was to be paid both to war history and statistics. 
Attached to the Depot-Generaal were a naval depot and a colonial depot, 'where all the maps, 
plans and memoranda relating to the colonies are to be stored. This Bureau shall be a part of 
the Ministry of Commerce and Colonies, nonetheless it shall be under the command of the 
Director of the Depot-Generaal van Oorlog.'45) The job of the n
 aval and colonial depots, like 
that of the general depot, was to consist of (statistical) descriptions and historiography.46) The 
director of the depot was C.R.Th. Kraijenhoff; his cousin, M.J. de Man, was the deputy-director 
in charge of the daily running of the depot.47) 
 In August 1806, this depot assumed control of the VOC charts and plans kept in the 
charterkamer in Amsterdam from the Aziatische Raad ( Asiatic Council). A list of the holdings of 
the charterkamer in June 1806 has survived.48) Hundreds of items are described in it. A table 
of contents from the mapbook of Isaac de Graaff has been added. The list is not exhaustive. It 
does not include the holdings in the stuurmanskamer . We may assume that the attention 
being paid to actual problems meant that a portion of the older maps and drawings were not 
described. 
 The foundation for a central collection of maps and drawings relating to the colonies was laid 
in 1806. Between 1806 and 1810 the maps and drawings were administered and listed by A. 
Ampt Cz., and after him by the director of colonial maps, Brunsveld van Hulten.49) The 
inventory from this period has not been preserved in its entirety, but excerpts from it give an 
impression: archive maps and map collections, largely printed, were mixed up together in a 
system based on geographical classification.50) 
 In 1808 Ampt proposed that the colonial section in the Depot-Generaal be expanded by the 
addition of the Romswinckel Collection (bought by Louis Napoleon) and with what was available 
for the Depot-Generaal van Oorlog.'51) In 1809 he sketched the history of the collection 'of the 
geographical, topographical and hydrographical section of the colonies' as follows: 'The original 
stock in this assemblage consisted of a considerable collection which were entrusted to the 
undersigned ...by the erstwhile Americaanschen Raad (American Council); other documents 
bought as supplementary material, as well as those from the Asiatic Council ... were added by 
me'. Ampt thought that 'the memoranda and other papers concerning the defence of the 
colonies and the expansion of cultivation, serving as an explanation of the plans and drawings' 
were complementary to the collection.52) The emphasis on defence and cultivation reflects the 
policy preoccupations of the period. 
 This plan of the collection of maps and memoranda is preserved in the General State 
Archives. It is a French inspired classification, expounded upon in publications like the 
Instruction pour le Directeur du Dépôt des Colonies. 53) The starting point of this instruction is 
to form series according to the type of document: charts; building plans of ships; plans of 
establishments; topographical maps; and so forth. Each of these series has an individual index 
in which maps can be traced chronologically with the aid of the geographically classified 
sections which are arranged alphabetically.54) 
 Traces of Ampt's work remain on some of the maps and drawings preserved in The Hague. 
Usually they have a blue label pasted on the back. On this label is a note of in which index, in 
which section, and under which folio number the map in question is described. Ampt, who was 
himself a mapmaker, described the maps and drawings of the whole ministry, thereby also 
including the West India region and waters. It is evident from the stamps and other 
classificatory marks, to say nothing of the blue paper which has been pasted on, that after 
1806 Ampt included the current charts which were available in the stuurmanskamer in 
Amsterdam in his inventory. 
 In the autumn of 1808 the De pot-Generaal was moved from The Hague to Amsterdam. The 
various collections could be housed there in the newly appointed premises in the Oude 
Turfmarkt. This meant that the goal of centralization had been accomplished in a material 
sense. When the map collections of the ministries of the navy and the colonies were combined 
in1806, part of the chart holdings of the former VOC, in particular the eighteenth century 
charts which were considered to be important for the production of new maps, went to the 
naval depot.55) 
 In 1810 the colonial map holdings were described in twenty-seven registers: twelve of these 
contain descriptions of maps which either wholly or in part could have originated from the VOC. 
The mapbook of Isaac de Graaff is not described in the registers, but is mentioned separately in 
a packing list.56) 
 Unfortunately these registers have not been preserved in their entirety; this makes it 
difficult to make an estimate of the number of sheets which had come from the VOC 
collections. The total, excluding the 188 pages in De Graaff's mapbook, will not have been less 
than 400.57) 
 In the summer of 1810 the plans to annex the kingdom of Holland to the French Empire 
prompted the French to take measures to transfer a selection of the maps and drawings from 
the collections of the navy and colonies to the French Dépôt de la Marine as quickly as possible. 
Napoleon sent his chamberlain, Auguste-Dieudonné-Emmanuel Comte de Las Cases, to 
Amsterdam in July 1810 to make preparations for the transfer.58) Although considerations of 
strategic importance were undoubtedly uppermost in Napoleon's mind, which meant that 
recent material relating to the colonies and the navy will have been given priority, historical 
interest also played a role. There is absolutely no doubt about how liberally the Emperor 
interpreted the selection. 'L'Empereur veut que le Dépôt Impérial de la Marine à Paris recueille 
de cette mission tous les avantages qu'elle pourra lui procurer', reported the Minister for the 
Navy, Decrès in a letter to the director of the French Dépôt.59) 
 In a report of the 13th July 1810, the director of the French Dépôt, De Rosily-Mesros, gave 
abundant information about how important the maps in The Netherlands were: '...non 
seulement des cartes et plans hydrographiques mais encore des cartes géographiques et 
topographiques de toutes les côtes et îles où les Hollandais ont eu des établissements. Outre 
les cartes des colonies Hollandaises qui sont en général les meilleurs qu'il y a ainsi faites, il doit 
y avoir dans les Dépôts de Hollande des plans des ports et rades des différentes parties du 
monde qui étaient fréquentées par les vaisseux Hollandais et la collection de ces plans serait 
une acquisition très importante pour le Dépôt Général [...] Monsieur le Baron [De las Cases] 
jugera sans doute qu'il vaut mieux conserver plus que moins: c'est le moyen le plus sûr de ne 
pas perdre des connaissances précieuses.'60) 
 Decrès introduced De Las Ca ses' mission to the prince-governor, Lebrun, who had been 
appointed shortly before in these words: 'L'object de sa mission est de s'occuper autant qu'il 
aura bien, du recueillement des cartes et plans du possessions d'outre mer de la Hollande, et 
de l'état des objets de cette nature dont doit s'enrichir le Dépôt Impérial'.61) In Amsterdam the 
inventories of the depots of the navy and the colonies were made available.62) De las Cases 
sent the catalogues to Paris for advice. On the basis of the catalogues only a very small number 
of maps and drawings were exempted from requisition: only duplicates of those maps that 
were already in the possession of the French Dépôt. 63) Of the maps and drawings in the so-
called 'VOC registers', only a paltry eight sheets were not to be sent to Paris.64) Meanwhile the 
experts in the French Dépôt had also set their sights on as yet uncatalagued cartographic 
material in other locations: "Les deux inventaires qui ont été envoyés à Son Excellence 
[Decrès] indiquent qu'une petite partie des cartes que la Hollande devait posséder. On ne 
trouve aucune des reconnaissances que les Hollandais ont faites des Mers de l'Archipel Indien, 
de la Nouvelle Guinée et de la Nouvelle Hollande, on n'y trouve rien sur les Molucques, sur 
Bornéo et sur Malaca et Sumatra. Il n'y a que très peu de chose sur la géographie de la colonie 
du Cap de Bonne Espérance et celle de la Côte de Guinée. Il est probable qu'il y a encore 
d'autres Dépôts en Hollande dont on recevra sans doute les inventaires. La Compagnie des 
Indes doit en avoir un qui peut-être fort précieux.'65) It is clear what the French experts were 
looking for: the former, extensive collection of the stuurmanskamer which had been handed 
over to the second examinator, Engelberts, in 1796. 
 The order for the formal transference of the Dutch Depot-Generaal was issued in a decree of 
Napoleon dated 18th August 1810. On the same day the Royal House of Louis Napoleon and 
the kingdom of Holland were abrogated. In a letter dated the 21st August Minister Decrès once 
again delicately reminded Lebrun that only that which was explicitly mentioned in the Imperial 
Decree was to remain behind in Holland 'et l'apport à Paris de tout ce qui n'est pas designé à 
l'état précité'.66) 
 On the 27th August1810 the Dutch Minister for the Navy, Paulus van der Heim, gave orders 
to the Dutch escort officers to take everything to Paris. The transportation of the five chests 
and one package took place first by ship from Rotterdam to Antwerp. From Antwerp they were 
carried by road. In Paris on the 13th September charge of the documents were taken over from 
Brunsveld van Hulten by Jean-Nicolas Buache de Neuville and Charles-François Beautemps 
Beaupré. Everything was deposited in the Dépôt de la Marine, situated in Maison d'Egmont-
Pignatelli in the Rue Louis-le-Grand 11, not far from the Place Vendôme.67) 
 In contrast to the written archives of the VOC therefore, the maps and drawings archives 
were transferred to Paris almost entirely intact -at least, the holdings of the charterkamer and 
a major part of the holdings of the stuurmanskamer in Amsterdam-, including maps and 
drawings of which, as yet, no inventory had been made by the Depot-Generaal. The Dutch 
Depot of the Navy and the Colonies was abolished by decree of the 28th December 1810.68) 
At the same time it was decided to transfer the maps which had been left in Amsterdam to 
Paris. In May 1811 the maritime prefect of Antwerp forwarded a further thirteen chests and 
one iron box containing archives and maps to Paris.69) It is not clear whether this consignment 
actually reached Paris. A receipt dated November 1815 states in so many words that the maps 
that were exempted from transfer by Napoleon's decree of the 18th August 1810, were never 
deposited in Paris.70) As far as the VOC maps are concerned, this was only a matter of eight 
sheets. 
 With the exception of a stamp, the maps in the General State Archives which were returned 
from the Dépôt de la Marine bear no other French classificatory marks. In Paris between 1810 
and 1814 there had not been enough time to integrate them into French collections. This is 
perhaps understandable: the youngest of the three archivists was 72 and the oldest was 80.71) 
 
Post 1813 
Directly after the regaining of independence in 1813, efforts were begun to retrieve the 
archives, paintings and other objects which had been taken away to Paris. The return of 
archives was stipulated in the peace treaty which was concluded in Paris on the 30th May 1814 
(Article 31). The responsibility for the maps and drawings claimed by the Netherlands was 
entrusted to the former deputy-director of the Depot-Generaal van Oorlog, M.J. de Man, in July 
1815.72) 
 At the end of November 1815, De Man repo rted that he 'exceptionally successful 
notwithstanding all opposition' in his tracking down of the colonial maps.73) Besides the 
resistance he had encountered in Paris, he had been faced with practical problems. De Man had 
had to feel his way in an occupied city. A lot of his time was spent in visiting allied commanders 
and French authorities. The French delayed his work, possibly because they wanted to quickly 
make copies of the maps to be returned. The plan of Batavia by Tency, the original of which is 
now in the General State Archives, remained behind in the collection of the Dépôt de la Marine 
as a tracing. Even printed maps were traced, for example the map of the Malabar coast by Van 
Keulen. This same map of Malabar is proof that this was a rush job on the part of the French. 
The printed map itself turned up in a corner of the Dépôt de la Marine.74) 
 On the 26th October 1815 De Man got the French minister for the navy to issue a restitution 
order to De Rosily-Mesros at the Dépôt de la Marine. De Rosily-Mesros had to hand over the 
maps on the basis of the catalogues which had been made by the Dutch Depot at the time of 
transfer, 'qui pourra servir à leur vérification'.75) This is an interesting phrase. In 1810 eight 
sheets from the VOC holdings, which had been explicitly exempted in the Imperial Decree on 
the basis of the transport inventories, could be kept in Amsterdam. All the rest, thus including 
those which were not described in the inventory, had to be taken to Paris. In 1815 the maps 
were returned on the basis of the inventory. This meant that the former collection from the 
stuurmanskamer and other maps which had not been catalogued were lost to De Man's sight. A 
few of the maps which had indeed been inventorized could not be found in 1815. There were 
not many according to a catalogue of them compiled by De Man.76) 
 Due to De Man's efforts duri ng the winter of 1815/1816 two chests with maps and drawings 
relating to the colonies were brought back to the Netherlands and deposited in the 
charterkamer of the ministry of colonies in The Hague.77) When he sent the maps and 
drawings, De Man reported on the15th November 1815, that: 'herewith I enclose, as far as the 
Department of the Colonies is concerned, the origin
 al catalogue of maps and plans which were 
transported hither from Holland and in which all those documents I have retrieved have been 
indicated with red stripes, those marked with an o (according to a Royal Decree of 
Napoleon18th August1810) remained behind in Holland and are to be found in the Department 
of Colonies.'78) There is no known copy of this annotated catalogue of Ampt and Brunsveld van 
Hulten. The holdings are described in the packing list as follows: 26 packets, each of which 
contains the maps of one register (Asia etc.); the mapbook of De Graaff in two volumes; 7 
packages of memoranda and letters; 13 maps on linen or rolled up, described in register 27; 8 
rolled maps not described in the catalogue (separately specified: maps of the West); and 14 
cartons (papers of H.W. Daendels). The chests arrived in the Netherlands on the 8th December 
1815. The reclaimed paintings of the House of Orange had been returned not long before. De 
Man had also played a role in this: helped by Prussian soldiers, he himself had taken the Bull by 
Potter from the wall of the Louvre and borne this and others paintings to a place of safety 
under escort which he led with drawn sword.79) 
 In the Netherlands the collection of the VO C maps and drawings which had been brought 
back from Paris in 1815 were housed in the charterkamer of the ministry in the Binnenhof in 
The Hague. Other parts were still stored in warehouses with the written archives: one section 
was in Amsterdam and the rest in Middelburg and other cities where the VOC had had 
chambers. After 1815 the various archives dating from the VOC period were collected together 
in Amsterdam in the Westindisch Slachthuis by the Ministry of Colonies.  
 The administration of archives under the Ministry of Colonies was not particularly conducive 
to the preservation of documents. Quite a lot was destroyed in the Westindisch Slachthuis. In 
1821 the minster gave permission for all the duplicates in archives in Amsterdam as well as 
those documents which, for instance, had been irretrievably damaged by water to be sold as 
waste paper. Included in this clean up was a 'chest of old, useless charts'.80) In their 
springclean the administrators adopted the principle: what is no longer of use for the present 
administration, will be the first to go. In a number of cases this led to the destruction of 
historically important documents. One of the people whose indignation was roused by this was 
the government archivist, R.C. Bakhuizen van den Brink. In 1856 this prompted him to 
comment on the custom of using parchment maps to bind papers.81) This was a time-
honoured custom: outdated parchment maps retained their material value and in the 
seventeenth century they had already been used to bind letters and papers. Victor de Stuers, 
well known advocate for the preservation of the Dutch heritage, was indignant about the 
abuses in the management of archives. Referring to the views of the East Indies from the 
boardroom of the Heren XVII
 (now in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam) he wrote: 'These works, 
partially reduced to shreds, have recently been found in a peat store.'82) 
 During the first half of the 19th century, the collection of maps and drawings in Amsterdam 
was added to with items which came to light in other places. About 1850 the archives of the 
former VOC in Amsterdam were inspected. The report only makes a general mention of the 
existence of 'maps, plans, illustrations of forts'.83) (See Appendix 14 for a diagram of the VOC 
map holdings.) 
 
 
3. TRANSFER TO AND ARRANGEMENT IN THE GENERAL STATE ARCHIVES 
 
 The removal of the state archives from th e Binnenhof to the Plein (in The Hague) in 1854 
was used by the Ministry of Colonies to urge for the handing over of the colonial archives dating 
from before 1813. This transfer was accomplished in the summer of 1856. According to the 
official report, on this occasion four chests and one package with maps and drawings were 
transported from Amsterdam.84) 
 Besides the collections from th e storehouses of the ministry of colonies, in 1860 the General 
State Archives possessed (a small number) of maps and drawings of the East which had 
belonged to the archives of the States General and the States of Holland and to several private 
archives. All these holdings were brought together in the collection 'foreign maps'. In 1863 
Bakhuizen van den Brink appointed the retired naval officer, P.A. Leupe, to make an inventory 
of them.85) Leupe added miscellaneous acquisitions and gifts of charts and maps of the 
colonies to the collected holdings, so that the most recent maps in his catalogue date from the 
middle of the nineteenth century. Between 1863 and 1866 the maps and drawings which had 
been bound in with theOvergekomen brieven en papieren in the VOC and the WIC archives 
were detached from their volumes and added to the collection of foreign maps. This detaching 
was unfortunately carried out with only somewhat summary references to the place of origin. 
 In 1866, the minister of foreign affairs gave  permission for the publication of Leupe's 
catalogue.86) This was the first printed finding aid to a holding in the possession of the General 
State Archives. A supplement to Leupe's catalogue appeared nearly fifty years later.87) 
Because of the merging of the map collections of the ministries of the navy and of the colonies 
during the Batavian Republic and the French occupation, in the 19th century part of the VOC 
maps ended up in the Ministry of the Navy. The collections deposited and formed there were 
also described by Leupe.88) This collection can also be consulted in the General State Archives. 
 
 
4. MAPS AND DRAWINGS DEPOSITIED ELSEWHERE AND GONE ASTRAY 
 
 In some cases maps and drawings of premis es and buildings of the VOC at home in the 
Netherlands have strayed into local archives and museums. Likewise, some of the maps and 
drawings in the General State Archives relating to possessions in and the trade with Asia have 
also become detached from their original archival context. Some of them were abstracted from 
their original place during the VOC era, for instance for the making of copies in mapbooks or 
series of maps. Furthermore, the disregard for archive management in the first half of the 
nineteenth century was also a factor in the mislaying of maps. Antiquarian interest likewise 
played a role. The antiquarian Frederik Muller took a portfolio of maps, which he later deposited 
in the General State Archives, from the collections of the West Indian Company in Middelburg. 
Less honest examples can also be posited: maps and drawings were also abstracted from the 
archives and sold. In this fashion some maps have found their way into the General State 
Archives by way of a detour, but others have ended up in other places.89) 
 A large number of VOC maps are now in Paris. The confused situation there in1814/1815 
was a contributory factor in not all the Dutch holdings from the Dépôt de la Marine being 
returned. Besides the loose VOC maps and drawings which were mislaid, the former collection 
in the stuurmanskamer in Amsterdam is important. This collection, which consists largely of 
hand-drawn charts, roughly estimated at 400 sheets (perhaps even a few hundred more), was 
absorbed into the collection of the Dépôt de la Marine. Nearly the entire collection of old maps 
and plans from this Dépôt, the name of which was changed to Service Hydrographique de la 
Marine, was handed over to the Departement des Cartes et Plans of the Bibliothèque Nationale 
in Paris in three stages. Other sections of the old collections, in a remarkable manoeuvre of the 
respect des fonds, were deposited in theArchives Nationales and the military collections in the 
Chateau of Vincennes in Paris and the Service Hydrographique in Brest.90) 
 Besides maps from the VOC archives, in the holdings of the Service Hydrographique, there 
are also maps of the VOC octrooigebied which originally came from the archives and collections 
of the stadhouder, William V, which were confiscated in 1796.91) There are no printed finding 
aids to the maps and drawings collections of the Service Hydrographique which contains more 
than just charts. A photocopy of the inventory of the collections of the Service Hydrographique 
is available in the maps and drawings reading room of the General States Archives.92) 
 Another important collection is that of the models of VOC ships. In the Ministry of the Navy 
these have been added to the models of admiralty and naval ships. This collection was 
described in the middle of the nineteenth century.93) Through the good offices of Victor de 
Stuers this collection was handed over to the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam in its entirety.94) 
The ship plans which belong to the model collection are preserved in the General State Archives 
(code MTSH), but as far as is known these do not include any plans of VOC ships. 
 
 
5. THE ARCHIVES OF HULST VAN KEULEN AND OF ESTABLISHMENTS IN ASIA 
 
Hulst van Keulen 
As far as the maps of the octrooigebied of the VOC are concerned, the archives of Hulst van 
Keulen can be considered semi-private. During the nineteenth century the firm of Van Keulen 
had connections with the navy.95) A large part of its archives was destroyed even before its 
liquidation in 1885. Frederik Muller mentions a large-scale clearance of 'an enormous quantity 
of hand-drawn and printed charts and maps' by the new head.96) Presumably he was referring 
to J. Staats Boonen, who became head of the business in 1823. After the business was closed 
down, in 1885 its map holdings were auctioned. The remaining maps were probably included 
among the maps of the ministry of the navy, which are now in the General State Archives and 
was described by Leupe.97) 
 
Establishments in Asia and the Cape of Good Hope 
Maps which were produced or adminstered in former VOC establishments in Asia have, in 
principle, been preserved in those places themselves. However, a great deal has been lost. 
Largest collections of maps were those of the VOC administrations in the Cape of Good Hope 
and Ceylon.98) In Colombo, for instance, an important part of the administration of land has 
been preserved in both written and cartographic form.99) 
 The most important collection was naturally th at formed in Batavia. In 1811 T.S. Raffles 
appointed a commission whose task it was to make 'a general record and collection of all 
archives, official documents, maps and plans, which had pertained to the various departments 
and offices under the former French government'. Amongst other things this commission 
produced 'registers of maps and plans, which had belonged to the Department of Engineering, 
under the former French Government' (ca. 1812).100) Probably all the maps and drawings 
then available in Batavia were described in the registers mentioned: Daendels had followed the 
example of the Batavian Depot-Generaal and assembled all the maps and drawings made by 
the military engineers. Nonetheless, the same Daendels also gave orders to destroy old papers 
which had no value. This undoubtedly had enormous consequences for the maps and drawings.  
 Those which escaped destruction were described by the government archivist, F. de Haan. 
In his catalogue, in which more than 1100 maps and drawings from the middle of the 
seventeenth century to the middle of the nineteenth century are described (the number of 
sheets from the VOC period is much less than 1100), there are no sheets referring to the areas 
outside Indonesia.101) This collection is now in the Arsip Nasional in Jakarta. A small number 
of the VOC maps and drawings in the Arsip Nasional has been photographed and can be 
consulted in the General State Archives. 
 
 
6. DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF MAPS AND DRAWINGS IN THE GENERAL STATE 
ARCHIVES 
 
VOC maps and drawings are contained in the collections with the following letter codes: MCAL, 
VEL and VELH. The catalogues of these collections are divided into a main classification of 
charts, on the one hand, and maps and plans, on the other. These two main categories are 
subdivided geographically. In many instances both categories will have to be consulted because 
of the fairly arbitrary division between charts and maps. The catalogues are provided with 
indexes of personal names and geographical names. It should be borne in mind that much less 
material can be found with the help of the index than by means of the geographical 
classification. 
 The maps and drawings in the collections VEL and VELH are available on micro-fiches. It is 
advisable to consult the material first with the help of these fiches. This is quicker; one can 
make a selection of what one then wishes to see in the original. The mapbook of Isaac de 
Graaff -during the whole of the eighteenth century the standard cartographic work of the Heren 
XVII - and several other cartographic works of the VOC are available in the map and drawings 
reading room in the form of photo atlases and facsimile editions. 
 In the collection VEL especially, there are de scriptions of many maps and drawings which 
were detached from the series of Overgekomen brieven en papieren during the 19th century. 
This is sometimes mentioned in the column Aanmerkingen (remarks), for example 
Overgekomen, 1655 (Received, 1655). If one knows or assumes that a drawing belongs with a 
letter or a report in the series of Overgekomen brieven en papieren, one should consult the 
back of the drawing. Often there is there an indication of origin written in pen, for instance, 
Ceylon, 1722, 3e deel (Ceylon, 1722, third part). Using this indication one can easily look up 
the chronological tables of contents of the Overgekomen brieven en papieren, and then relate 
the map or drawing and the written document to each other. 
 
 
Notes 
 
1. Robaert (died before or in 1617) supplied paskaarten (sea charts) in 1600 for the fitting out 
of Van Neck's fleet: J.K.J. de Jonge, De opkomst van het Nederlandsch gezag in Oost-Indië I 
('s-Gravenhage 1862) 183. 
 
2. C.A. Davids, Zeewezen en wetenschap. De wetenschap en de ontwikkeling van de 
navigatietechniek in Nederland tussen 1585 and 1815 (Amsterdam en Dieren 1985) 398. 
 
3. For De Graaff and Van Keulen: M. Kok, Ontwikkelingen in de Nederlandse maritieme 
kartografie in de achttiende eeuw (1730-1815) (typescript; Utrecht 1980) 48 and 51. The letter 
of appointment for De Graaff in 1705 is almost identical with that of Willem Jansz. Blaeu in 
1633. 
 
4. At least this was the practice in the eighteenth century. In 1633 upon his appointment 
Willem Jansz. Blaeu was awarded a fixed yearly salary of 300 guilders, over and above his 
piece wages,: Pieter van Dam, Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie first volume, part 
1. F.W. Stapel ed. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën, grote serie 63 ('s_Gravenhage 1927) 404. 
 
5.  Ibidem, 415. 
 
6. On 1st July 1723 the shipwright Brouwer was asked either to lease his shipyard or to sell it; 
VOC, inv. nr. 251, Resolutions of the Amsterdam Chamber. The examinator van de stuurlieden, 
Mattheus Soetens, was not permitted to run his own school for navigational skills after his 
appointment; VOC, inv. nr. 360, instructions of the Amsterdam Chamber for its employees. 
See also K. Zandvliet, Joan Blaeu's Boeck vol kaerten en beschrijvingen van de Oostindisch 
Compagnie [...]' in: J.E. Huisken and F. Lammertse eds., Het kunstbedrijf van de familie 
Vingboons. Schilders, architecten en kaartmakers in de gouden eeuw (Maarssen etc. 1989) 59-
95. 
 
7. J. Publido-Rubio, El piloto mayor de la Casa de Contracion de Sevilla... (n.p. 1950); A. 
Cortesao and A. Teixeira de Mota, Monumenta Portugaliae Cartographica I (Lisboa 1960) 19-21 
and III, 41-49 and 87-89, and IV, 4 and 79; N.J.W. Thrower ed., The compleat Plattmaker. 
Essays on Chart, Map and Globe Making in England in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth 
Centuries (Berkeley etc. 1978) 45-100. 
 
8.  Zandvliet, 'Joan Blaeu's Boeck', 75. Compare G. Schilder, 'Organization and Evolution of the 
Dutch East India Company's Hydrographic Office in the Seventeenth Century', Imago Muni 28 
(1976) 61-78, and G. Schilder, 'Het cartografisch bedrijf van de VOC' in: Patrick van Mil and 
Mieke Scharloo eds., De VOC in de kaart gekeken. Cartografie en navigatie van de Verenigde 
Oostindische Compagnie 1602-1799 ('s-Gravenhage 1988) 17-45. 
 
9.  Amongst other things the artikelbrief (terms of appointment) of 2nd March 1634, 12th item, 
Article 110, in J.A. van der Chijs ed., Nederlandsch-Indisch Plakaatboek I (Batavia and 's-
Gravenhage 1885) 339. This condition is repeated in later terms of appointment. 
 
10. Supervision is stipulated in eighteenth century instructions to examinators van de 
stuurlieden ; VOC, inv. nr. 255, Resolution of the Amsterdam Chamber, 11 December 1731, 
Instruction Cornelis Stuurman. This was in response to a request of the 28th March 1731 from 
the Heren XVII
. It is in character that the compilation of the seaman's guide for the East, the 
sixth part of the Zee-fakkel, was produced by theexaminator, Jan de Marre. 
 
11. Besides legger, the terms origineele and slaper were used; Van der Chijs ed., Plakaatboek 
VI, 15 January 1753. 
 
12. J.W. Heydt, Allerneuester Geographisch- und Topographischer Schau-Platz von Africa und 
Ost-Indien... (Wilhermsdorff 1744) 44. 
 
13. Facsimile edition with an introduction by C. Verner and R.A. Skelton (London 1970). 
 
14. VOC, inv. nr. 164, Resolution Heren XVII
, 14 March 1729. 
 
15. Kok, 'Cartografie van de firma Van Keulen', 34. 
 
16. For the atlases of Vingboons and Van der Hem, see F.C. Wieder ed., Monumenta 
Cartographica. Reproductions of Unique and Rare Maps, Plans and Views... (6 volumes; 's-
Gravenhage 1925-1933); Schilder, 'Organization and evolution'; J.Th.W. van Bracht ed., Atlas 
van kaarten en aanzichten van de VOC en WIC, genoemd Vingboonsatlas in het Algemeen 
Rijksarchief te 's-Gravenhage (Haarlem 1982) and Zandvliet, 'Joan Blaeu's Boeck' 
 
17. Table of contents dating from the time before the mapbook had been taken apart: Archives 
of the Raad der Aziatische Bezittingen en Etablissementen (Council for the Asian Possessions 
and Establishments) (hereafter: Archives of Aziatische Raad), inv. nr. 21, annex 112 by 
Resolution 27 June 1806; Archives of the Ministerie van Koloniën (Ministry of Colonies) 
supplement 1850-1952, inv. nr. 49. 
 
18. M. Kok, 'Cartografie van de firma Van Keulen' in: E.O. van Keulen et al. eds., 'In de 
Gekroonde Lootsman'. Het kaarten-, boekuitgevers en instrumentenmakershuis Van Keulen te 
Amsterdam 1680-1885 (Utrecht 1989). 
 
19. For the map series of Gerard van Keulen and the seaman's guide of Van Keulen and De 
Marre: Ibidem, 34 and 36. Facsimile edition: C. Koeman ed., De Nieuwe Groote Ligtende Zee-
fakkel (Amsterdam 1969). 
 
20. Hans H. van Rooij and Jerzy Gawronski, VOC-schip Amsterdam (Haarlem 1989). In 1727 
explicit instructions were given by the Admiralty to deposit plans and models in the archives: 
ARA, Fagel Collection, inv. nr. 1099. Grateful thanks to B. Kist. 
 
21. Zeeland Chamber: VOC, inv. nr. 14336, account for the outfitting of the ships the 
Amsterdam and the Zon, 1606, f. 12, Barend Langenes. 
 
22. The Amsterdam Chamber paid more than 1447 pounds to Robaert for paskaarten (sea 
charts) for the equipage of the five ships which sailed in 1616. Some of these charts were sent 
to and charged to the Chambers of Middelburg, Delft, Rotterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen; VOC, 
inv. nr. 14338, account for the ninth equipage of the Amsterdam Chamber, 1616, f. 19v. 
 
23. 'Kaarten sullen voor alle de cameren werden gemaakt bij Hessel Gerrits' (Maps will be 
made for all chambers by Hessel Gerritsz.), 11 September 1628: VOC, inv. nr. 13790, 
Equipage Ledger; Van Dam, Beschryvinge first book, Part I, 403 (cites the Resolution of the 
Heren XVII of 11th July 1628). A confirmation of the stipulation: 6 June 1669 VOC, inv. nr. 
4456, report of the Haags Besogne . 
 
24. VOC, inv. nrs. 4456, report of the Haags Besogne, and 4601, report of the conferences of 
the Heren XVII
 committee for inspecting the books, 4 June 1669. The reason for the discussion 
was the excessive bill which the mapmaker Joan Blaeu presented for the year 1668: 21,135 
guilders, 9 guilders per parchment map. 
 
25. P.A. Leupe, Inventaris der verzameling kaarten berustende in het Rijks archief. Ie gedeelte 
('s-Gravenhage 1867) v-vi, Resolutions Heren XVII
,  23rd October 1666 and 19 and 21 October 
1684. 
 
26. It is possible that after 1747 Hoorn and Enkhuizen once again began to purchase their 
maps from local suppliers: Kok, 'Cartografie van de firma Van Keulen', 38. For the Zeeland 
Chamber see: Schilder, 'Cartografisch bedrijf', 34. 
27. The numbers VEL 1184 to 1187 can be seen as a version of this pre-cadastral map (revised 
until 1706). 
 
28. For the instructions for military engineers, see: Van de Chijs ed., Plakaatboek. 
 
29. Ibidem VI, 15th January 1753, appointment Pieter Hermannus Ohdem, and 6th March 
1753. In the latter decree the salary of the examinator was raised. 
 
30. A number of these painted views and maps of the Company's establishments is preserved 
in the Rijksmuseum: P.J.J. van Thiel et al. , Alle schilderijen van het Rijksmuseum te 
Amsterdam (Amsterdam and Haarlem 1976) 105 (A19), 509-510 (A4481 and A4482) and 664 
(A4471 to 4476). 
 
31. VOC, inv. nr. 4639, lists of maps received from Asia. In the 1814 inventory of the charters 
and a register of maps which have been bound into books and bundles is again mentioned. 
 
32. Van Dam, Beschryvinge first book, part I, 403. 
 
33. Ibidem, 415 (1633) and in Van Keulen's letter of appointment (1786). It is true that in the 
case of Van Keulen 'the leggers lodged with the Company' are mentioned, but perhaps we 
should take this to refer to the models which have been mentioned earlier. If this is the case, 
the Company kept authorized copies of every map and navigational instrument in 
thestuurmanskamer. 
 
34. Most of these lists have been published: Schilder, 'Organization and Evolution', 64-68 and 
Kok, Ontwikkelingen, enclosures I.1 to I.6. 
 
35. VOC, inv. nr. 232, Resolutie Amsterdam Chamber, 22nd November 1638. 
 
36. Van Dam, Beschryvinge first book, part I, 414. Therefore management of the maps and 
drawings collections (the archives) was not one of the duties of the mapmaker. 
 
37. VOC, inv. nr. 4597, balance sheet for 1781. In the invoice of commodities and supplies 
assembled in the warehouse of the Amsterdam Chamber, 300 charts and 150 blank charts with 
the compass lines printed are mentioned. In Van Keulen's instruction (1786), it is stated that in 
the event of his resignation or death the maps would be resumed for the prices mentioned in 
the approved list. This phraseology indicates that there was a stock of charts in Van Keulen's 
shop. 
 
38. In the stuurmanskamer of the VOC there was a buffer stock of sets of charts available. An 
equipage list of 1788 states which persons were responsible for the supply of goods, victuals 
and so forth: 'moet worden ingevuld door den equipagemeester, opzigter van de 
stuurmanskamer, opzigter van het slagthuis, opzigter van de wapenkamer' (must be entered 
by the master of the equipage, the supervisor of the stuurmanskamer , the overseer of the 
abattoirs, by the overseer of the arsenal); VOC, inv. nr. 4964. The accounts of the VOC gives 
the impression that large amounts of maps were regularly supplied and paid for: Isaac de 
Graaff received 1381 guilders on 31st October 1721 (VOC, inv. nr. 7148, journal of the chief 
accountant of the Amsterdam Chamber, f. 276); the widow of Johannes van Keulen received 
2985 guilders on 31st October 1772 (VOC, inv. nr. 7163, journal of the chief accountant of the 
Amsterdam Chamber, f. 54). 
 
39. In the directors' boardroom in Hoorn in 1796 there were thirteen framed old maps and 
prints; Archives of the Comité tot de Oost-Indische handel en bezittingen (hereafter: Archives 
Oostindisch Comité), inv. nr. 159. 
 
40. VOC, inv. nr. 13866. 
 
41. Archives Oostindisch Comité (East India Comittee), inv. nr. 28, minutes of Equipage 
Department, 30th September and 7th October 1796. 
 
42. Archives Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 28, Instruction of 28th September 1800. As far as can be 
investigated, this list has not survived. 
 
43. By decree of 27th June 1806, no. 112, Kraijenhoff was sent a copy of the 'inventory of 
maps, plans and memoranda concerning the East Indies and the Cape of Good Hope'; Archives 
Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 37. It is possible that this was the same inventory used in August 
1806 for the delivery of Ampt's maps. 
 
44. See the inventories of written archivalia: VOC, inv. nrs. 13862-13865 and 14924-14926, 
'generaal register van alle de Compagnie's boeken welke uit Indien naar Patria werden 
gezonden'' (general register of all the Company's books which were sent from Asia to the 
Netherlands), 1612-1794; February 1807 (Delft Chamber), f. 40; Inventory of Marine en 
Koloniën (Inventory of Navy and Colonies), 1814, f. 91 no. 128, f. 98 no. 191, f. 109 kist 8, f. 
118 kist 13 no. 64; 28 August 1816; VOC, inv. nr. 14931, inventory of the East Indian Archives 
in the Westindisch Magazijn in Amsterdam compiled by De Munnick, 1828. 
 
45. Archives of the Ministerie van Koophandel en Koloniën (Ministry for Commerce and the 
Colonies) (hereafter: Archives Min. K. & K.), inv. nr. 2, enclosure report gen. dir., July-
December 1806 no. 27, Art. 7 of the Royal Decree. 
 
46. See the instruction to the director (Arts. 3 and 4), Archives of Depot-Generaal van Oorlog 
(General Depot for War)1806-1811 (hereafter: Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog), inv. nr. 21. Some 
doubts could be raised bout how much historiography was written at that period. This was the 
case in Paris. Archives Min. K. & K., inv. nr. 79 (index Oost), 31st wijnmaand 1810 (October) 
no. 21. 
47. M.D. Lammerts, 'Het depot-generaal van Oorlog', Ons Leger 26 (1940) 321-325. See also 
H.A.J. van Schie, Inventaris van de archieven van het Comité tot de algemene zaken van het 
bondgenootschap te Lande ... ('s-Gravenhage 1979) introduction. 
 
48. The 'staat en inventaris van Koophandel en Koloniën (balance sheet and inventory) of 
1814, f. 6, mentions the inventory of the books and papers from the charterkamer of the 
former VOC 'waarbij de lijst der kaarten en plans' (including the list of maps and plans), 
delivery on 15th August 1806. The list, which has been preserved, is dated 27th June 1806: 
Archives Aziatische Raad, inv. nr. 21, annex 112 to Resolution of 27th June 1806. 
 
49. Archives of the Ministerie van Marine en Koloniën (Ministry of the Navy and Colonies)1795-
1813 (hereafter: Archives Min. M. & K.), exh. 17th December 1808 no. 5. 
 
50. Archives of the Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken (Ministry for Foreign Affairs) (hereafter: 
Archives Min. BZ), Legatie Frankrijk (French Legation), inv. nr. 80. 
 
51. Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog, inv. nr. 9, letters of Ampt, 26th March 1808 and 5th April 
1808: 'from which division I foresee a fine acquisition for the field of the colonies...'. 
 
52. Archives of the Departement van Marine (Naval Department)1798-1810, inv. nr. 212, 
letters received, 6th February 1810. 
 
53. The instruction is composed in line with the Royal Decree of 1st March 1807, Art. 8253. The 
text of the instruction can be found in: Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog, inv. nr. 21. 
 
54. See J.A.M.Y. Bos-Rops et al. eds., De archieven in het Algemeen Rijksarchief. Overzichten 
van de archieven en verzamelingen in de openbare archiefbewaarplaatsen in Nederland IX 
(Alphen aan de Rijn 1982) 471-473. Ampt expatiated on the method of inventorization in a 
memorandum of 31st December 1807; Archives Dep.-Gen., inv. nr. 29. Ampt's memo is a 
further development of the system of arrangement stipulated in the instruction (see note 53). 
The working methods of the Depot-Generaal were still very renowned in the middle of the 
nineteenth century and perhaps exercised some influence on Leupe: J.J.F. Noordziek, 
Archiefwezen 1826-1852. Met eene korte opgave van den inhoud van eenige boekerijen ('s-
Gravenhage 1853) 62-64. 
 
55. VOC charts are mentioned in an enclosure to De Man's missive of 15th November 1815 to 
the Minister for the Navy in which he specifies details about the transfer of maps and so forth 
to the department of the former. They include: 4 maps of the Coromandel coast; 6 maps of the 
island of Ceylon; 4 maps of Ceylon and the Maldives; 4 maps of the Malabar coast. 
 
56. The following registers refer to the VOC: nr. 1 Asia; nrs. 2 and 3 Java; nrs. 4 and 5 Ceylon; 
nr. 6 East Indies; nr. 7 Africa; nr. 8 Guinea coast; nrs. 9 to 11 Cape of Good Hope; and nr. 27 
framed maps (probably taken from the boardroom). 'Extraits des catalogues des cartes, 
plans...', 16th August 1810, and an packing list of 1815; Archives Min. BZ, Legatie Frankrijk, 
inv. nr. 80. Also in the Archives of Oorlog en Topografisch Bureau (War and Topographical 
Bureau), inv. nr. 15. 
 
57. From Register nr.12 America in 1810 a, nr. 85, was singled out as the highest number. The 
drawing of the spice mill in Colombo (VEL 982) was described, according to the caption, in the 
fifth Register, part 1, folio 25. Therefore the register may well have consisted of two parts, 
each containing at least 25 pages. I assume that each register could contain (Register nr. 12, 
America contained at least 85 numbers) about 100 descriptions. In view of the fact that the 
division into numbers of registers will have been based partly on thecartographic and drawing 
material available, it seems to me that the estimate of 400 sheets for the VOC is more likely to 
be too low than too high. 
 
58. E.A.D. Comte de Las Cases, Mémoires [...] communiqués par lui-même [...(Bruxelles 1818) 
31-32. 
 
59. Paris, Archives Nationales, Marine (hereafter: Arch. Nat. Marine), BB2, inv. nr. 122. letter 
from the Minster of the Navy and Colonies to the French Dépôt-Général/Impérial, 12th July 
1810. 
 
60. Arch. Nat. Marine, BB3, inv. nr. 350, letter from De Rosily to the Minister of the Navy and 
the Colonies, Decrès. 
 
61. Archives of the Prins Stedehouder, inv. nr. 10, letter from the French Minister for the Navy, 
Decrès, to the Prins Stedehouder, 10th July 1810. 
 
62. Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog, inv. nr. 5, order from the ministers of War and the Navy, 15th 
July 1810. 
 
63. This is specified in an extract catalogue of 17th August 1810. Both the extract catalogue 
and the complete catalogues of the holdings of the navy and the colonies were sent to the Prins 
Stedehouder in Amsterdam on 21st August 1810 by the French Minister for the Navy and the 
Colonies, Decrès: Archives Prins Stedehouder, inv. nr. 10. Leadership of the operation in 
Amsterdam remained in the hands of De Las Cases. See also: Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog, inv. 
nr. 9, 16th July 1810. 
 
64. Copy Imperial Decree of 18th August 1810, with a specification of the numbers exempted, 
described in the extract catalogue of 16th August 1810: Archives Min. BZ, Legatie Frankrijk, 
inv. nr. 80. Also in Archives Prins Stedehouder, inv. nr. 8 
 
65. Arch. Nat. Marine, BB3, inv. nr. 350, letter from Buache (seen by Rosily) to the Minister of 
the Navy and the Colonies, 7th August 1810. 
 
66. Arch. Nat. Marine 1JJ, inv. nr. 51, duplicate letter from the Minister of the Navy and the 
Colonies to Lebrun, 21st August 1810. 
 
67. Archives Dep.-Gen. Oorlog, inv. nr. 9, commission of Van der Heim. 
 
68. Archives Min. M. & K., inv. nr. 79, exh. 28th December 1810. 
 
69. Archives of the Hollandse Divisie (Dutch Division) of the Ministry of the Navy and Colonies 
in Paris, 1810-1814, inv. nr. 6, letter from the maritime prefect to the Minister of the Navy and 
the Colonies, Decrès, in Paris, 22nd May 1811. 
 
70. Reçu De Man of 22nd November 1815: Arch. Nat. Marine, 1JJ, inv. nr. 52. 
 
71. G.A. Covillault, Histoire des archives et de la bibliothèque du Service Hydrographique de la 
Marine (Paris 1979) 18-19. 
 
72. Royal Decree 13th July 1815 no. 21, on the recommendation of Goldberg, staatsraad 
Koophandel en Koloniën (state councillor for Commerce and the Colonies) exh. 10th July 1815 
no. 644. Follow up to Koophandel en Koloniën, 16th November 1814 no. 419 and 17th 
December 1814 no. 26. There is an explicit reference to the mapbook of Isaac de Graaff in the 
Royal Decree concerned. 
 
73. Archives Min. BZ, Legatie Frankrijk, letter from De Man to Fagel, 24th October 1815, and 
from De Man to the Minster for War, 15th November 1815 no. 59 (quotation). 
 
74. Map of Batavia: Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, Collection Service Hydrographique 193/5/6; 
ARA, VEL 1192 (with the marks of Ampt's inventorization: Reg. 2, part 1 f. 5). Map of Malabar: 
Paris, Bibl. Nat., Coll. Serv. Hydr. 206/2/23; ARA, MCAL nr. 4198. 
 
75. Arch. Nat. Marine, 1JJ, inv. nr. 52. 
 
76. Lists of 22nd November 1815 in: Arch. Nat. Marine 1JJ, inv. nr. 52. This also includes a 
statement by De Man in which he declares which of the maps, drawings and models which 
appear in the catalogue of 1810 can no longer be found. 
 
77. On 16th February 1816 the senior clerk, Zimmerman, was authorized (exh. Minister of 
Colonies no. 966) to take charge of the documents and to keep them in the charterkamer of 
the ministry; Archives of the Ministerie van Koloniën (Ministry of Colonies), 1814-1848 
(hereafter Archives Min. Kol.), inv. nr. 117, annex to report 8th December 1815 no. 3767 and 
Archives of Oorlog en Topografisch Bureau, inv. nr. 15. Signed receipt: Idem, inv. nr. 15. 
 
78. Archives Min. BZ, Legatie Frankrijk, inv. nr. 80. The state councillor for Commerce and the 
Colonies, Goldberg, confirmed receipt of the original catalogue on 21st November 1815, ARA, 
private archive De Man. 
 
79. Th.L. Lunsingh Scheurleer, 'De Stadhouderlijke verzamelingen' in: 150 jaar Koninklijk 
Kabinet van Schilderijen, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Koninklijk Penningkabinet ('s-Gravenhage 
1967) 9-50, especially 38-39. 
 
80. According to the clerk, C. Bras, in a note of 2nd October 1821 about goods he had come 
across in the 'former shipyard'. This note ties in with the decrees of the Ministry of Colonies of 
26th January 1821 and 27th November 1821 no. 26/1. 
 
81. R. Fruin, De gestie van dr. R.C. Bakhuizen van den Brink als archivaris des rijks 1854-1865 
[...] ('s-Gravenhage 1926) 74. 
 
82.  V. de Stuers, Holland op zijn smalst [...] (Bussum 1975) 69; originally appeared as an 
article in De Gids (1873). 
 
83. Noordziek, Archiefwezen, 68. 
 
84. Archives Min. Kol., inv. nr. 541, exh.15th September 1856 A19. 
 
85. Fruin, Gestie, 193. 
 
86. P.A. Leupe, Inventaris der verzameling kaarten berustende in het Rijksarchief. Eerste 
gedeelte ('s-Gravenhage 1867). Code: VEL. 
 
87. S.P. l'Honoré Naber, Inventaris der verzameling kaarten berustende in het Algemeen 
Rijksarchief. Eerste supplement ('s-Gravenhage 1914). Code: VELH. 
 
88. P.A. Leupe, Catalogus der verzameling van kaarten van het Ministerie van Marine ('s-
Gravenhage 1872). Code: MCAL. 
 
89. For maps and drawings in other collections see: M.P.H. Roessingh, Sources to the history of 
Asia and Oceania in the Netherlands I. Sources up to 1796 (München 1982) and Wieder, 
Monumenta Cartographica.   
90. For a survey see: Sources de l'Histoire de l'Asie et de l'Océanie dans les Archives et 
Bibliothèques françaises II. Bibliothèque Nationale (München etc. 1981) 249-261. One part of 
the VOC maps in the Bibliothèque Nationale, the hand-drawn charts on parchment from before 
1700, has been included in a bibliography: M. Dèstombes, Catalogue des cartes nautiques 
manuscrites sur parchemin 1300-1700. Cartes hollandaises. La cartographie de la Compagnie 
des Indes Orientales 1593-1743 (Saigon 1941). More recent, but with the same limited scope, 
is M. Foncin, M. Dèstombes and M. de la Roncière, Catalogue des cartes nautiques sur vélin 
conservées au Département des Cartes et Plans (Paris 1963). 
 
91. M. Pastoureau, 'Histoire de la Bibliothèque Nationale. Géographie et cartographie à la BN 
pendant la Révolution: un rendez-vous manqué', Revue de la Bibliothèque Nationale 32 (1989) 
65 and 67. 
 
92. Inventaire sommaires des portefeuilles du Service Hydrographique de la Marine 
(typescript). 
 
93. J.M. Obreen, Catalogus der verzameling van modellen van het Departement van Marine ('s-
Gravenhage 1858). 
 
94. De Stuers, Holland op zijn smalst, 70. 
 
95. Verhandelingen en Berigten betrekkelijk het Zeewezen 5 (Amsterdam 1845). See also: 
W.C. Crama and A.C.J. Vermeulen, 'Van zeevaartkundig etablissement tot koffiehuis' in: Van 
Keulen et al. eds., 'In de Gekroonde Lootsman' 72-83. They write that, when the business was 
closed down in 1885, the charts were sold en masse to Seijffardt's bookshop. It seems to me 
this refers to the stock. 
 
96. G.D. Bom HGz., Bijdragen tot eene geshiedenis van het geslacht 'Van Keulen' (Amsterdam 
1885) 23-25. 
 
97. Verzameling van kaarten van het Ministerie van Marine (code MCAL). 
 
98. For South Africa: List of Archivalia in South African Archives Depots (4th impression; 
Pretoria 1987) 66. 
 
99. J. van Kan, Compagniesbescheiden en aanverwante archivalia in Britsch-Indië en op Ceylon 
(Batavia 1931) 211 and 214; J.L. Brohier and J.H.O. Paulusz., Land, Maps and Surveys: 
Descriptive Catalogue of Historical Maps in the Surveyor General's Office II (Colombo 1951);  
S.A.W. Mottau, 'Archival Collections for Studies of the Dutch in Ceylon', Journal of the Dutch 
Burgher Union of Ceylon 60 (1982) 67-80. 
 
100. J.A. van der Chijs, Inventaris van 's Lands Archief te Batavia, 1602-1816 (Batavia 1882) 
vi and 325. 
 
101. This catalogue has been published: Inventory of Cartographic Manuscripts of the 
Seventeenth to the Nineteenth Century (Jakarta 1986). See also: Guides to the Sources of 
Asian History IV. Indonesia (Jakarta 1989) 49. 
















CHAPTER 7.  LITERATURE 
 
 
The quantity of literature about the history of the VOC is very large and still continues to grow. 
The bibliography below in no way pretends to be complete. The aim has been to provide the 
reader with a survey of the most important literature. 
 The literature has been divided into categories. Naturally this has its limitations, as 
overlapping of the categories is inevitable. Nonetheless, it has been considered to be the most 
useful form of presentation. The division of the categories is obvious: 
A.  VOC - General 
B.  Source publications 
C.  Archives 
D.  Maps 
 Literature pertaining to the history of the VOC has been placed in Category A. A 
relatively large place has been assumed by works about the VOC enterprise in the Republic 
(Category A III). By contrast, literature about the business in Asia (Category A IV) has been 
kept to a bare minimum. The selection here was strictest. This category only contains the most 
important introductory works, mostly monographies. They have been divided up according to 
region. Literature dealing with Asian and African history, in as far as this is connected to Dutch 
expansion, has been omitted.  
 The lists of the source publications (Categ ory B) has also been restricted. Only large 
continuous series have been included. Published travel journals and reports have been left 
out.On the vicissitudes of the VOC archives in the Netherlands and in the places where archives 
have been preserved in Asia and South Africa (Category C), the bibliography is fairly extensive, 
but not exhaustive. For the cartography and maps of the VOC the bibliography is only very 
selective (Category D). 
 More extensive approaches are mentione d in the Category Bibliographies. Good 
annotated bibliographical introductions are moreover to be found in Overzee, Nederlandse 
koloniale geschiedenis 1590-1975 (Haarlem 1982), and in the Algemene geschiedenis der 
Nederlanden; as well as in Eberharhard Schmitt, Thomas Schleich and Thomas Beck eds., 
Kaufleute als Kolonialherren: die Handelswelt der Niederländer vom Kap der Guten Hoffnung 
bis Nagasaki 1600-1800. Schriften der Universitätsbibliothek Bamberg 6. Exhibition Catalogue 
(Bamberg 1988); and in Femme S. Gaastra, De geschiedenis van de VOC (2nd revised edition; 
Zutphen 1991).  
 
 
A. VOC - General 
 
 
I. Bibliographies
 
 
 
Coolhaas, W.Ph., and G.J. Schutte, A Critical Survey of Studies on Dutch Colonial History
 (2nd 
edition; Den Haag 1980) 
 
Hartmann, A., Repertorium op de literatuur betreffende de Nederlandsche kolonieën, voor 
zoover zij verspreid is in tijdschriften en mengelwerken I. Oost-Indië 1866-1893 ('s-
Gravenhage 1895) and 1e-8e vervolg 1894-1932 ('s-Gravenhage 1901-1934) 
 
Hooykaas, J.C., Repertorium op de koloniale literatuur, of systematische inhoudsopgaaf van 
hetgeen vorkomt over de koloniën, (beoosten de Kaap) in mengelwerken en tijdschriften, van 
1595 tot 1865 uitgegeven in Nederland en zijne overzeesche bezittingen (2 volumes; 
Amsterdam 1877-1880) 
 
Itinerario. Current Annotated Bibliography of Dutch Expansion Studies (annual) 
 
Krogt, P. van der, and J. Landwehr, A Bibliography of Publications Relating to the Dutch East 
India Company: 1600-1800 (Utrecht 1991) 
 
Looyenga, A.J., Overzicht van Nederlandse studies over de geschiedenis der Europese 
expansie, verschenen sinds 1945 / A survey of Dutch studies on the history of European 
expansion, published since 1945. Nieuwsbrief werkgroep geschiedenis Europese expansie 2, 1 
(Leiden 1976) 
 
Tijdschrift voor Zeegeschiedenis
 (annual bibliography) 
 
 
II. General Literature Concerning Trade Companies and the European and Dutch Expansion
 
 
 
General 
 
 
Blussé, L., and F.S. Gaastra eds., Companies and Trade. Essays on Overseas Trading 
Companies during the Ancien Régime (The Hague 1981) 
 
Chaudhuri, K.N., The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660-1760
 
(Cambridge 1978) 
 
Furber, Holden, Rival Empires of Trade in the Orient, 1600-1800
 (Minneapolis 1976) 
 
Furber, H., 'The History of East India Companies: General Problems' in: M. Mollat ed., Sociétés 
et compagnies de commerce en Ouest et dans l'Océan Indien (Paris 1970) 415-418 
 
Furber, H., 'The History of East India Companies: General Problems', The Indian Ocean Review
 
1 (1988) 2-16 
 
Mauro, Frédéric, L'expansion européenne (1600-1870)
. Nouvelle Clio 27 (1964; 3e revised 
edition; Paris 1988) 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'Een vergelijkend onderzoek van bestuur en handel der Nederlandse 
en Engelse handelscompagnieën op Azië in de eerste helft van de zeventiende eeuw', Bijdragen 
en mededelingen betreffende de geschiedenis der Nederlanden 91 (1976) 196-217 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'The Structures of Trade in Asia in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
Centuries. Niels Steensgaard's "Carracks, Caravans and Companies". A Critical Reappraisal', 
Mare Luso-Indicum
 4 (1980) 1-43 
 
Mollat, Michel, ed., Sociétés et compagnies de commerce en Orient et dans l'Océan Indien
 
(Paris 1970) 
 
Reinhard, W., Geschichte der europäischen Expansion
 I. Die alte Welt bis 1818 (Stuttgart 
1983) 
 
Scammell, G.V., The First Imperial Age. European Expansion ca. 1400-1715
 (London 1989) 
 
Smith, W., 'The European-Asian Trade of the Seventeenth Century and the Modernisation of 
Commercial Capitalism', Itinerario
 6, 2 (1982) 68-90 
 
Steensgaard, N., The Asian Trade Revolution of the Seventeenth Century. The East India 
Companies and the Decline of the Caravan Trade (Chicago and London 1974), 2nd edition of 
Carracks, Caravans and Companies (Copenhagen 1973) 
 
Wake, C.H.H., 'The Changing Pattern of Europe's Pepper and Spice Imports, ca. 1400-1700', 
The Journal of European Economic History
 8 (1979) 361-403 
 
 
Netherlands 
 
 
Asaert, G., et al. eds., Maritieme geschiedenis der Nederlanden
 (4 volumes; Bussum 1976-
1978) 
 
Aymard, Maurice, ed., Dutch Capitalism and World Capitalism/Capitalisme hollandais et 
capitalisme mondial (Cambridge and Paris 1982) 
 
Boxer, J.R., The Dutch Seaborne Empire, 1600-1800
 (London 1965), in Dutch translation: Het 
profijt van de macht. De republiek en haar overzeese expansie 1600-1800 (Amsterdam 1988) 
 
Brakel, S. van, De Hollandsche handelscompagnieën der zeventiende eeuw. Hunne ontstaan, 
hunne inrichting (Den Haag 1908) 
 
Bruijn, J.R., 'Productivity, Profitability and Costs of Private and Corporate Dutch Shipping: 
Some 17th and 18th Century Aspects' in: J. Tracy ed., Rise of Merchant Empires
 (Cambridge 
and New York 1989) 
 
Colenbrander, H.T., Koloniale geschiedenis
 (3 volumes; 's-Gravenhage 1925-1926) 
 
Coolhaas, W.Ph., 'Overzeese geschiedenis 1648-1795' in: Algemene geschiedenis der 
Nederlanden VIII (Haarlem 1955) 
 
Glamann, K., Dutch-Asiatic Trade, 1620-1740
 (Copenhagen and 's-Gravenhage 1958; reprint 
's-Gravenhage 1980) 
 
Haan, Hans de, Moedernegotie en grote vaart. Een studie over de expansie van het Hollandse 
handelskapitaal in de 16e en 17e eeuw (Amsterdam 1977) 
 
Israel, J.I., Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585-1740
 (Oxford 1989), in Dutch translation: 
Nederland als centrum van de wereldhandel, 1585-1740 (Franeker 1991) 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., et al. eds., Dutch Authors on Asian History. A Selection of Dutch 
Historiography on the Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie. Translation series Koninklijk instituut 
voor taal-, land- en volkenkunde 22 (Dordrecht 1988) 
 
Overzee. Nederlandse koloniale geschiedenis 1590-1975
 (Haarlem 1982) 
 
Schutte, G.J., De Nederlandse Patriotten en de koloniën. Een onderzoek naar hun denkbeelden 
en optreden, 1770-1800 (Groningen 1974) 
 
 
 
 
III. Literature Concerning the VOC Enterprise in the Republic 
 
 
Berg, N.P. van den, Uit de dagen der Compagnie
 (Haarlem 1904) 
 
Boxer, J.R., Jan Compagnie in War and Peace 1602-1799
 (Hongkong etc. 1979), in Dutch 
translation: Jan Compagnie in oorlog en vrede. Beknopte geschiedenis van de VOC (Bussum 
1977) 
 
Brugmans, I.J., 'De Oost-Indische Compagnie en de welvaart in de Republiek' in: Welvaart en 
historie. Tien studiën (1950 z.p.) 
 
Bruijn, J.R., 'De personeelsbehoefte van de VOC overzee en aan boord, bezien in Aziatisch en 
Nederlands perspectief', Bijdragen en mededelingen betreffende de geschiedenis der 
Nederlanden 91, 2 (1976) 218-248 
 
Bruijn, J.R., 'The Dutch East India Company as Shipowner, 1602-1796', The American Neptune
 
47, 4 (1987) 240-248 
 
Bruijn, J.R., F.S. Gaastra and I. Schöffer, Dutch-Asiatic Shipping in the 17th and 18th 
Centuries. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën 165-167 (3 volumes; Den Haag 1979 and 1987) 
 
Bruijn, J.R., and E.S. van Eyck van Heslinga, Muiterij. Oproer en berechting op schepen van de 
VOC (Bussum 1980) 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, De stichting der Vereenigde O.I. Compagnie en de maatregelen der 
Nederlandsche regering betreffende de vaart op Oost-Indië welke haar voorafgingen (Leiden 
1856); Idem, De geschiedenis der stichting van de VOC (2nd edition; Leiden 1857) 
 
Daalder, R., and F. Scholte eds., Rotterdam en de VOC
. Bulletin Historisch Museum Rotterdam 
2 (Rotterdam 1988) 
 
Dillen, J.G. van, Het oudste aandeelhoudersregister van de Kamer Amsterdam der Oost-
Indische Compagnie. Werken uitgegeven door de vereeniging Het Nederlandsch Economisch-
Historisch Archief 14 ('s-Gravenhage 1958) 
 
Doe, E. van der, and A. Wiggers, 'De Kamer Zeeland van de VOC als werkgeefster: enige 
opmerkingen over haar personeel aan de wal in de tweede helft van de 18e eeuw', Zeeuws 
tijdschrift 37, 3 (1987) 107-113 
 
Eyck van Heslinga, E.S. van, Van Compagnie naar koopvaardij. De scheepvaartverbinding van 
de Bataafse Republiek met de koloniën in Azië 1795-1806 (Amsterdam and 's-Gravenhage 
1988) 
 
Gaastra, F.S., De geschiedenis van de VOC
 (Haarlem 1982; 2nd edition Zutphen 1991) 
 
Gaastra, Femme Simon, Bewind en beleid bij de VOC. De financiële en commerciële politiek van 
de bewindhebbers, 1672-1702 (Zutphen 1989) 
 
Gaastra, F.S., 'De Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie in de 17e en 18e eeuw: de groei van 
een bedrijf. Geld tegen goederen. Een structurele verandering in het Nederlands-Aziatisch 
handelsverkeer', Bijdragen en mededelingen betreffende de geschiedenis der Nederlanden
 91, 
2 (1976) 249-272 
 
Gaastra, F.S., 'Leiden en de VOC' in: D.E.H. de Boer ed., Leidse facetten: tien studies over 
Leidse geschiedenis (Zwolle 1982) 
 
Gaastra, F.S., 'The Exports of Precious Metal from Europe to Asia by the Dutch East India 
Company, 1602-1795' in: J.F. Richards ed., Precious Metals in the Later Medieval and Early 
Modern World (Durham 1983) 447-476 
 
Gelder, Roelof van, and Lodewijk Wagenaar, Sporen van de Compagnie: de VOC in Nederland
 
(Amsterdam 1988) 
 
Heer, C. de, Bijdrage tot de financieele geschiedenis der Oost-Indische Compagnie
 ('s-
Gravenhage 1929) 
 
Heeres, J.E., 'De Oost Indische Compagnie' in: Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch-Indië
 I (2nd 
edition; 's-Gravenhage and Leiden 1917) 
 
Horst, W.A., 'De peperhandel van de Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie', Bijdragen voor 
Vaderlandsche geschiedenis en Oudheidkunde 8e reeks, 111 (1942) 95-103 
 
Houtzager, H.L., et al. eds., Delft en de Oostindische Compagnie
 (Amsterdam 1987) 
 
Hullu, J. de, Op de schepen der Oost-Indische Compagnie. Vijf artikelen van J. de Hullu
. J.R. 
Bruijn and J. Lucassen eds. (Groningen 1980) 
 
Hullu, J. de, 'De instelling van de Commissie voor de Handel der O.I.C. op China in 1756', 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië
 79 (1923) 523-545 
 
Hullu, J. de, 'Over de Chinasche handel der Oost Indische Compagnie in de eerste dertig jaar 
van de 18de eeuw', Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië
 73 
(1917) 32-151 
 
In dienst van de VOC
. Themanummer Leidschrift 4, 2 (1987-1988) 
 
Iongh, D. de, Het krijgswezen onder de Oostindische Compagnie
 ('s-Gravenhage 1950) 
 
Jörg, C.J.A., Porselein als handelswaar. De porseleinhandel als onderdeel van de Chinahandel 
van de VOC 1729-1794 (Groningen 1978), in English translation: Porcelain and the Dutch 
China Trade (The Hague 1982) 
 
Kan, J. van, De rechtstitels der Compagnie
. Mededelingen Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie 
van Wetenschappen N.R. 5/8, afd. Letterkunde (Amsterdam 1942) 
 
Kan, J. van, Uit de rechtsgeschiedenis der Compagnie
 (Batavia and Bandoeng 1930-1935) 
 
Kist, J.B., et al. eds., Van VOC tot werkspoor. Het Amsterdamse industrieterrein Oostenburg
 
(Utrecht 1986) 
 
Kist, J.B. and J.H.G. Gawronski eds., Prijs der zee. Vondsten uit wrakken van 
Oostindiëvaarders. Exhibition Catalogue Rijksmuseum Amsterdam (Amsterdam 1980) 
 
Klerk de Reus, G.C., Geschichtlicher Ueberblick der administrativen, rechtlichen und finanziellen 
Entwicklung der Niederländisch-Ostindischen Compagnie. Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen 47 (Batavia and 's-Gravenhage 1894) 
 
Korte, J.P. de, De jaarlijkse financiële verantwoording in de Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie. 
Werken uitgegeven door de vereeniging Het Nederlandsch Economisch-Historisch Archief 17 
(Leiden 1984) 
 
Lequin, F., 'A New Approach to the History of the Dutch Expansion in Asia: The Personnel of the 
Dutch East India Company in the Eighteenth Century', Journal of European economic history
 8 
(1979) 431-437 
 
Mansvelt, W.M.F., Rechtsvorm en geldelijk beheer bij de Oost-Indische Compagnie
 (Amsterdam 
1922) 
 
Marsden, P., De laatste reis van de Amsterdam
 (Bussum 1974), in English translation: The 
wreck of the Amsterdam (London 1974) 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'Hoe rationeel was de organisatie van de Nederlandse Oost-Indische 
Compagnie?', Economisch en sociaal-historisch jaarboek
 44 (1982) 170-190 
 
Overvoorde, J.C. and P. de Roo de la Faille eds., De gebouwen van de Oost-Indische 
Compagnie en van de West-Indische Compagnie in Nederland (Utrecht 1928) 
 
Pol, A., 'Tot gerieff van India: geldexport door de VOC en de muntproduktie in Nederland 1720-
1740', Jaaarboek voor munt- en penningkunde
 72 (1985) 65-195 
 
Roey, J. van, 'Enkele Antwerpse aantekeningen bij het oudste aandeelhoudersregister van de 
Kamer Amsterdam der Oost-Indische Compagnie', Liber Amicorum Van Valkenburg
, 251-154 
 
Rooij, Hans H. van and Jerzy Gawronski, VOC-schip Amsterdam
 (Haarlem 1989) 
 
Roos, D., Zeeuwen en de VOC
 (Middelburg 1987) 
 
Schmitt, Eberhard, Thomas Schleich and Thomas Beck eds., Kaufleute als Kolonialherren: die 
Handelswelt der Niederländer vom Kap der Guten Hoffnung bis Nagasaki 1600-1800. Schriften 
der Universitätsbibliothek Bamberg 6. Exhibition Catalogue (Bamberg 1988) 
 
Scholten, C., De munten van de Nederlandsche gebiedsdeelen overzee 1601-1948
 (Amsterdam 
1951) 
 
Schouwenburg, K.L., 'Het personeel op de schepen van de Kamer Delft der VOC in de eerste 
helft der 18e eeuw', Tijdschrift voor zeegeschiedenis
 7, 1 (1988) 76-93 
 
Stapel, F.W., 'Bijdragen tot de geschiedenis der rechtspraak bij de Oostindische Compagnie', 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië
 89 and 90 (1932 and 
1933) 
 
Stapel, F.W., 'Johannes Hudde over de balansen van de Oostindische Compagnie', Economisch-
historisch jaarboek 13 (1927) 215-239 
 
Stapel, F.W., De VOC in de groote oorlogen der 17e eeuw
 (Groningen 1932) 
 
Stapel, F.W., De gouverneurs-generaal van Nederlandsch-Indië in beeld en woord
 ('s-
Gravenhage 1941) 
 
Stapel, F.W., 'Aandeelbewijzen der Oost-Indische Compagnie', Economisch-historisch jaarboek
 
13 (1927) 240-246 
 
Stapel, F.W., 'Het aantal bewindhebbers der Oostindische Compagnie in 1602', Bijdragen voor 
vaderlandsche geschiedenis en oudheidkunde (1928) 
 
Stapel, F.W. and E.L.G. den Dooren de Jong, 'De zeeverzekering der Vereenigde Oostindische 
Compagnie', Het verzekerings-archief
 9,4. Bijdragen tot de geschiedenis der zeeverzekering I 
('s-Gravenhage 1928) 
 
Steensgaard, N., 'The Dutch East India Company as an Institutional Innovation' in: M. Aymard 
ed., Dutch Capitalism and World Capitalism
 (Cambridge and Paris 1982) 235-257 
 
Steur, J.J., Herstel of ondergang. De voorstellen tot redres van de Verenigde Oost-Indische 
Compagnie 1740-1795 (Utrecht 1984) 
 
Stols, E., 'De Zuidelijke Nederlanden en de oprichting van de Oost- en Westindische 
Compagnieën', Bijdragen en mededelingen betreffende de geschiedenis der Nederlanden
 88 
(1973) 1-18 
 
Unger, W.S., 'Het inschrijvingsregister van de Kamer Zeeland der Verenigde Oost-Indische 
Compagnie', Economisch-historisch jaarboek
 24 (1950) 1-33 
 
Vaz Diaz, A.M., 'De deelname der Marranen in het oprichtingskapitaal der Oost-Indische 
Compagnie', Jaarboek Amstelodamum
 33 (1936) 
 
Wieringa, F.M. ed., De Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie in Amsterdam; verslag van een 
werkgroep (Amsterdam 1982) 
 
Willemsen, R., Enkhuizen tijdens de Republiek. Een economisch-hgistorisch onderzoek naar 
stad en samenleving van de 16e tot de 19e eeuw (Hilversum 1988) 
 
 
IV. Literature Concerning the VOC in Asia
 
 
 
General: 
 
 
All of One Company: the VOC in Biographical Perspective
 (Utrecht 1986) 
 
Arasaratnam, S., 'Monopoly and Free Trade in Dutch Asian Commercial Policy: Debate and 
Controversy within the VOC', Journal of Southeast Asian studies
 4, 1 (1973) 1-15 
 
Boxer, C.R., Dutch Merchants and Mariners in Asia 1602-1795
 (London 1988) 
 
Lequin, F., Het personeel van de Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie in Azië in de achttiende 
eeuw, meer in het bijzonder in de vestiging Bengalen (2 volumes; Leiden 1982) 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., et al., De VOC in Azië
 (Bussum 1976) 
 
Rhede van der Kloot, M.A. van, De gouverneurs-generaal en commissarissen-generaal van 
Nederlandsch-Indië 1610-1888, historisch-genealogisch beschreven ('s-Gravenhage 1891). 
Supplemented by W.Ph. Coolhaas in De Nederlandsche Leeuw 73 (1956) 1-34 
 
Wijnaendts van Resandt, W., De gezaghebbers der Oost-Indische Compagnie op hare buiten-
comptoiren in Azië. Genealogische bibliotheek 2 (Amsterdam 1944) 
 
 
Batavia: 
 
 
Abeyasekere, Susan, Jakarta. A History
 (Singapore etc. 1987) 
 
Blussé, Leonard, Strange Company. Chinese Settlers, Mestizo Women and the Dutch in VOC 
Batavia. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 122 
(Dordrecht and Riverton 1986) 
 
Breuning, H.A., Het voormalige Batavia. Een Hollandse stedestichting in de tropen. Anno 1619
 
(1952) (2nd edition; Utrecht 1981) 
 
Haan, F. de, Oud Batavia
 (2 volumes; Batavia 1922) 
 
Taylor, Jean Gelman, The Social World of Batavia. European and Eurasian in Dutch Asia
 
(Madison and London 1983) 
 
 
Java: 
 
 
Haan, F. de, Priangan. De Preanger-regentschappen onder het Nederlandsch bestuur tot 1811
 
(4 volumes; Batavia 1910-1912) 
 
Nagtegaal, L., Rijden op een Hollandse tijger: de Noordoostkust van Java en de VOC, 1680-
1740 (diss. Utrecht 1988) 
 
 
Ambon: 
 
 
Graaff, H.J. de, De geschiedenis van Ambon en de Zuid-Molukken
 (Franeker 1977) 
 
Knaap, G.J., Kruidnagelen en christenen. De Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie en de 
bevolking van Ambon 1656-1696. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 125 (Dordrecht and Providence 1987) 
 
 
Banda: 
 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, De vestiging van het Nederlandsche gezag over de Banda-eilanden (1599-
1621) (Batavia 1886) 
 
 
Japan: 
 
 
Boxer, C.R., Jan Compagnie in Japan 1600-1850
 (Den Haag 1950) 
 
Goodman, Grant K., Japan: the Dutch Experience
 (Leiden 1967) 
 
Mulder, W.Z., Hollanders in Hirado 1597-1641 (Weesp 1985) 
 
Nachod, Oskar, Die Beziehungen der Niederländischen Ostindischen Kompanie zu Japan im 
siebzehnten Jahrhundert (Leipzig 1897) 
 
 
China: 
 
 
Wills Jr., J.E., Pepper, Guns and Parleys; the Dutch East India Company and China, 1662-1681
 
(Cambridge Mass. 1974) 
 
Blussé, Leonard, Tribuut aan China. Vier eeuwen Nederlands-Chinese betrekkingen
 
(Amsterdam 1988) 
 
 
Indochina: 
 
 
Buch, W.J.M., De Oost-Indische Compagnie en Quinam; de betrekkingen der Nederlanders met 
Annam in de XVIIe eeuw (Amsterdam 1929) 
 
Terpstra, H., De factorij der VOC te Patani
 ('s-Gravenhage 1938) 
 
 
Thailand: 
 
 
Brummelhuis, Han ten, Merchant, Courtier and Diplomat: A History of the Contacts between 
The Netherlands and Thailand (Lochem and Gent 1987) 
 
 
India 
 
 
Arasaratnam, S., Merchants, Companies and Commerce on the Coromandel Coast, 1650-1740
 
(Delhi 1986) 
 
Prakash, Om, The Dutch East India Company and the Economy of Bengal 1630-1720
 
(Princeton 1985) 
 
Raychaudhuri, Tapan, Jan Company in Coromandel 1605-1690. A Study in the Interrelations of 
European Commerce and Traditional Economies. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut 
voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 38 ('s-Gravenhage 1962) 
 
Roelofsz, M.A.P., De vestiging der Nederlanders ter kuste Malabar
. Verhandelingen van het 
Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 4 ('s-Gravenhage 1943) 
 
Santen, H.W. van, De Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie in Gujarat en Hindustan, 1620-1660
 
(Meppel 1982) 
 
Terpstra, H., De Nederlanders in Voor-Indië
 (Amsterdam 1947) 
 
Terpstra, H., De vestiging van de Nederlanders aan de kust van Koromandel (Groningen 1911) 
 
George D. Winius and Marcus P.M. Vink, The Merchant-Warrior Pacified. The VOC (Dutch East 
India Company) and its Changing Political Economy in India (Delhi etc. 1991) 
 
 
Ceylon: 
 
 
Arasaratnam, Dutch Power in Ceylon 1658-1687
 (Amsterdam 1958) 
 
Goonewardena, K.W., The Foundation of Dutch Power in Ceylon 1638-1658
 (Amsterdam 1958) 
 
Goor, J. van, Jan Kompenie as Schoolmaster. Dutch Education in Ceylon 1690-1795
 
(Groningen 1978) 
 
Pieris, P.E., Ceylon and the Hollanders
 (2nd edition; Tellippalai 1924) 
 
 
Persia and Arabia: 
 
 
Brouwer, C.G., Cauwa ende Comptanten: De Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie in Jemen / 
Cowha and Cash: The Dutch East India Company in Yemen 1614-1655 (Amsterdam 1988) 
 
Terpstra, H., De opkomst der Westerkwartieren van de Oost-Indische Compagnie (Suratte, 
Arabië, Perzië) ('s-Gravenhage 1918) 
 
 
Cape of Good Hope: 
 
 
Elphick, R., and Hermann Giliomee eds., The Shaping of South African Society, 1652-1820
 
(Cape Town and London 1979) 
 
 
B. Source publications 
 
 
Blussé, J.L., et al. eds., De dagregisters van het Kasteel Zeelandia, Taiwan, 1629-1662
 I. 
1629-1641. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën, grote serie 195 ('s-Gravenhage 198.) 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, ed., Nederlandsch-Indisch Plakaatboek 1602-1811
 (17 volumes; Batavia 
and 's-Gravenhage 1885-1900) 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, et al. eds., Daghregisters gehouden int Casteel Batavia vant passerende 
daer ter plaetse als over geheel Nederlandts-India (31 volumes; Batavia and 's-Gravenhage 
1888-1931) 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, ed., Realia. Register op de generale resolutiën van het Kasteel Batavia, 
1632-1805 (3 volumes; Den Haag and Batavia 1882-1885) 
 
Colenbrander, H.T. and W.Ph. Coolhaas eds., Jan Pietersz. Coen, bescheiden omtrent zijn 
bedrijf in Indië (7 volumes; 's-Gravenhage 1919-1953) 
 
Coolhaas, W.Ph., and J. van Goor eds., Generale missiven van gouverneurs-generaal en raden 
aan Heren XVII der Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën, 
grote serie 104, 112, 125, 134, 150, 159, 164, 193 and 205 (9 volumes; 's-Gravenhage 1960-
1988) 
 
Dam, Pieter van, Beschryvinge van de Oostindische Compagnie
. F.W. Stapel and C.W.Th. van 
Boetzelaer eds. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën 63, 68, 74, 76, 83, 87, 96 (7 volumes; 's-
Gravenhage 1927-1954) 
 
Davies, D.W., A primer of Dutch seventeenth century overseas trade
 ('s-Gravenhage 1961) 
 
Heeres, J.E., and F.W. Stapel eds., Corpus Diplomaticum Neerlando-Indicum. Verzameling van 
politieke contracten en verdere verdragen door de Nederlanders in het Oosten gesloten. 
Bijdragen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 57, 87, 91, 93 and 96 
('s-Gravenhage 1907-1955) 
 
Hovy, L., Ceylonees Plakkaatboek. Plakkaten en andere wetten uitgevaardigd door het 
Nederlandse bestuur op Ceylon, 1638-1796 (2 volumes; Hilversum 1991) 
 
Jonge, J.K.J., et al. eds., De opkomst van het Nederlandsch gezag in Oost-Indië
 (15 volumes; 
's-Gravenhage 1862-1909) 
 
Knaap, G.J. ed., Memories van overgave van gouverneurs van Ambon in de zeventiende en 
achttiende eeuw. Rijks geschiedkundige publicatiën, kleine serie 62 ('s-Gravenhage 1987) 
 
 
C. Archives 
 
 
I. General
 
 
 
Jaquet, F.G.P., ed., Sources of the History of Asia and Oceania in the Netherlands
 II. 1796-
1949 (München 1983) 
 
Roessingh, M.A.P., ed., Sources of the History of Asia and Oceania in the Netherlands
 I. 
Sources up to 1796 (München 1982) 
 
Bos-Rops, J.A.M.Y., et al. eds., De archieven in het Algemeen Rijksarchief
. Overzichten van de 
archieven en verzamelingen in de openbare archiefbewaarplaatsen in Nederland 9 (Alphen aan 
den Rijn 1982) 
 
 
II. VOC-archieven
 
 
Arasaratnam, S., 'The Use of Dutch Material for South-East Asian Historical Writing', Journal of 
Southeast Asian history 3 (1962) 95-105 
 
Baretta, Ch.F.A., 'Een kijkje in Indische Archieven', Nederlandse Archievenblad
 27 (1918-1919) 
56 
 
Berg, N.P. van den, 'Nota over de beteekenis van het oud archief ter Algemeene Secretarie te 
Batavia in vergelijk met de verzameling Indische stukken in 's Rijks Archief te 's-Gravenhage', 
Notulen der vergaderingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 
20 (1882) 43 
 
Brouwer, C.G., 'Holländische Archivquellen zur ökonomischen Geschichte Jemens im frühen 17. 
Jahrhundert' in: H. Becker and H. Kopp eds., Resultate aktueller Jemen-Forschung. Ein 
Zwischenbilanz (Bamberg 1978) 
 
Itinerario
 4, 2 (1980) special issue The new Algemeen Rijksarchief 
 
Klerk de Reus, G.C., 'Kritisch overzicht van "Dagh-Register gehouden in Casteel Batavia ..."', 
Indische Gids
 (1888) 616-625 
 
Lach de Bére, Ph., 'Indische archieven', Maandblad Genealogisch Heraldisch Genootschap 'De 
Nederlandsche Leeuw' 35 (1917) 272 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'Sources in the General State Archives in The Hague Relatintg to the 
History of East Asia between c.1600 and c.1800', Felicitation volumes of Southeast-Asian 
studies 1 (1965) 167-184 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., Van geheim tot openbaar. Een historiografische verkenning
 (Leiden 
1970) 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'Memories van overgave van bestuursambtenaren in het voormalige 
Nederlands-Indië', Nederlands Archievenblad
 72 (1968) 14-18 
 
Meilink-Roelofsz, M.A.P., 'The Private Papers of Artus Gijsels, a Source for the History of East-
Asia', Journal of Southeast Asian history
 10 (1969) 540-559 
 
'Reminiscences of a Scholar-Archivist; Interview with Prof. dr. M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz', 
Itinerario
 2, 2 (1977) 15-28 
 
Moreland, W.H., 'Dutch Sources for Indian History: 1590 to 1650', Journal of Indian history
 2 
(1923) 222-232 
 
Muller, F., 'Ervaringen in Nederlandsche archieven, meer in 't bizonder wat de koloniale 
archieven betreft', De Nederlandsche Spectator
 (1874) no. 28 
 
Overzicht van de inventarissen der oude Rijksarchieven in Nederland
 ('s-Gravenhage 1884) 
 
Quarles van Ufford, J.K.W., 'Beschouwingen over den toestand van het Indische archiefwezen', 
De economist
 (1891) 51-52 
 
Veth, P.J., 'Openbaarheid in koloniale aangelegenheden', De Gids
 (1848) no. 2 
 
Vreede, G.W., 'L.C.D. van Dijk' in: L.C.D. van Dijk, Neêrland's vroegste betrekkingen met 
Borneo, den Solo-archipel, Cambodja, Siam en Cochin-China (Amsterdam 1862) 1-14 
 
 
III. Other Archives in the General State Archives
 
 
Bijlsma, R., De archieven van de compagnieën op Oost-Indië, 1594-1603
 (Den Haag 1927) 
 
Buch, W.J.M., Inventaris van bescheiden der voormalige Nederlandsche bezittingen in Voor-
Indië (typescript; n.p.['s-Gravenhage] 1936) 
 
Inventaris vcan de archieven van de weeskamer Batavia, boekhouder-generaal te Batavia, 
schepenbank te Batavia ('s-Gravenhage 1980) 
 
Parani, Julianti L., Inventaris van het archief van de Nederlandse factorij te Canton 1742-1826 
(typescript; n.p.['s-Gravenhage] 1972) 
 
Roelofsz, M.A.P., Bescheiden van een collectie stukken, in 1862-'63 uit Batavia naar Nederland 
verzonden, voornamelijk het bestuur der Hooge Regeering over de buitenkantoren betreffende, 
1602-1827 (typoscript; n.p.['s-Gravenhage] n.d.) 
 
Roessingh, M.P.H., Het archief van de Nederlandse factorij in Japan/The archive of the Dutch 
factory in Japan 1609-1860 (typescript; 's-Gravenhage n.d.[1964]) 
 
 
IV. Jakarta
 
 
Alphen, van, 'Mededeelingen en opmerkingen betreffende den toestand der Gouvernements 
Archieven te Batavia dd. Batavia, Julij 1841', Tijdschrift voor Neerlandsch Indië
 4, 1 (Batavia 
1842) 86 
 
Berg, N.P. van den, 'Het archiefwezen in Indië', Indische Gids
 (1882) no. 2, 369-371 
 
Bloys van Treslong Prins, P.C., 'Het Landsarchief te Batavia', Navorscher
 (1928) 275, (1929) 
123, (1930) 128, 188, 213, 253, (1931) 
 
Bloys van Treslong, P.C., 'Het Oud-Archief te Weltevreden (Batavia)', Maandblad Genealogisch 
Heraldisch Genootschap 'De Nederlandsche Leeuw' 35 (1917) 122 and 270 
 
Blussé, Leonard, 'The Arsip Nasional of Jakarta', Itinerario
 3, 1 (1979) 36-41 
 
Chijs, J.A. van der, Inventaris van 's lands archief te Batavia, 1602-1816
 (Batavia 1882) 
 
Coolhaas, W.Ph., 'Het Landsarchief te Batavia', Historia
 14 (1949) 12-23 
 
Drooglever, P.J., 'Onaangeboorde bronnen in de Oost. De betekenis van de in Indonesië 
bewaard gebleven Indische archieven voor de geschiedwetenschap' in: K. Kooijmans et al. 
eds., Bron en publikatie
 ('s-Gravenhage 1985) 
 
Godée Molsbergen, E.C., 'Geschiedenis van het Landsarchief tot 1816', Tijdschrift voor Indische 
taal-, land- en volkenkunde 76, 1 (1936) 
 
Graaff, M.G.H.A. de, Verslag van een bezoek aan het Staatsarchief van Indonesië in het kader 
van de overeenkomst tot uitwisseling van microfilms, maart-april 1974 (Algemeen Rijksarchief, 
's-Gravenhage 1974) 
 
Guide to the Sources of Asian History
 IV. Indonesia vol. 1. National Archives (Jakarta 1989) 
 
Haga, A., 'Het oude archief te Batavia', Indische Gids
 (1882) no. 2, 724-725 
 
Hollander, J.J. de, 'Het oud archief te Batavia', De Indische Gids
 (1882) no. 2, 557 
 
Scheltema de Heere, G.A.N., 'Over de Oostindische landsarchieven', Indische Gids
 (1923) no. 
2, 860 
 
Verhoeven, F.R.J., 'Geschiedenis van het Indische Archiefwezen van 1816-1854', Tijdschrift 
voor Indische taal-, land- en volkenkunde van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch genootschap van 
kunsten en wetenschappen 80, 4 (1940) 461-529 
 
Verhoeven, F.R.J., Het landsarchief te Batava 1854-1942
 (typescript; n.p. n.d.) 
 
Verhoeven, F.R.J., Het Landsarchief van Nederlandsch-Indië 1892-1942
 (Batavia 1942) 
 
Wall, V.I. van de, Het lands-archief te Batavia
 
 
Wijnaendts van Resandt, W., 'Het Oud-Archief te Weltevreden (Batavia)', Maanblad 
Genealogisch Heraldisch Genootschap 'De Nederlandsche leeuw' (June 1917) 
 
Wijnmalen, Th.C.L., 'Het beheer der gouvernementsarchieven in Nederlandsch-Indië', De 
Nederlandsche Spectator (1871) no. 39 
 
Wijnmalen, Th.C.L., 'Nog een woord over de archieven in Indië', De Nederlandsche Spectator
 
(1871) no. 47 
 
 
V. Sri Lanka, India and Malaysia
 
 
Anthonisz, R.G., Report on the Dutch Records in the Government Archives at Colombo
 
(Colombo 1907) 
 
Bijlsma, R., 'De aan Nederland gebleven bescheiden van de etablissementen in Voor-Indië', 
Nederlandsch Archievenblad
 3/4 (1931-1932) 
 
Heyligers, A.J.M., Press List of Ancient Dutch Records from 1657 to 1825. Beschrijvende 
catalogus van de hele Hollandsche massa te Madras (Madras z.d.) 
 
s'Jakob, H.K., ed., De Nederlanders in Kerala 1663-1701. De memories en instructies 
betreffende het commandement Malabar van de Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie. Rijks 
geschiedkundige publicatiën, kleine serie 43 ('s-Gravenhage 1976) 
 
Jurriaanse, M.W., Catalogue of the Archives of the Dutch Central Government of Coastal 
Ceylon, 1640-1796 (Colombo 1943) 
 
Kan, J. van, Compagniesbescheiden en aanverwante archivalia in Britsch-Indië en op Ceylon
 
(Batavia 1931) 
 
Kemp, P.H. van der, 'De Nederlandsche factorijen in Voor-Indië in den aanvang der 19e eeuw', 
Bijdragen tot de taal- land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië
 (1901) 
 
Kemp, P.H. van der, Het Nederlandsch-Indisch bestuur in het midden van 1817
 ('s-Gravenhage 
1915) 
 
Kemp, P.H. van der, 'De jaren 1817-1825 der Nederlandsche factorijen in Hindostans oostkust', 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië
 (1918) no. 1-2 
 
List of Volumes of Dutch and Danish Records Preserved in the Madras Record Office
 (Madras 
1916) 
 
Low, D.A., J.C. Iltis and M.D. Wainwright, Government Archives in South Asia. A Guide to 
National and State Archives in Ceylon, India and Pakistan (Cambridge 1969) 
 
Mottau, S.A.W., Inventory of the Archives of the Dutch Government in the Division of Galle 
(Matara) and Jaffnapatnam 1640-1796; with a List of Reconstructed 17th Century Tombos by 
J.S. Wigboldus and Addenda to the Catalogue of the Archives of the Dutch Central Government 
of Coastal Ceylon 1640-1796 by M.W. Jurriaanse. M.E. van Opstall ed. (The Hague 1975) 
 
Supplementary Catalogue of Dutch Records
 (Madras 1952) 
 
Verhoeven, F.R.J., 'The Lost Archives of Dutch Malacca, 1641-1824', Journal of the Malaysian 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 37 (1964) no. 2, 11-28 
 
 
VI. Cape Town
 
 
Botha, Graham, A Brief Guide to the Various Classes of Documents in the Cape Archives for the 
Period 1652-1806 (Kaapstad 1918) 
 
 
D. Kaarten van de VOC 
 
 
Bijlsma, R., 'Het oudste kaartboek van een scheepvaart der VOC', Nederlandsch Archievenblad
 
33 (1925-1926) 137-141 
 
Bracht, J.Th.W. van, ed., Atlas van kaarten en aanzichten van de VOC en WIC, genoemd 
Vingboonsatlas in het Algemeen Rijksarchief te 's-Gravenhage (Haarlem 1982) 
 
Davids, C.A., Zeewezen en wetenschap. De wetenschap en de ontwikkeling van de 
navigatietechniek in Nederland tussen 1585 en 1815 (Amsterdam and Dieren 1985) 
 
L'Honore-Naber, S.P., Inventaris der verzameling van kaarten berustende in het Algemeen 
Rijksarchief. Eerste supplement ('s-Gravenhage 1914) 
 
Keuning, J., 'Hessel Gerritsz', Imago Mundi
 6 (1949) 49-66 
 
Kok, M., Ontwikkelingen in de Nederlandse maritieme kartografie in de achttiende eeuw (1730-
1815) (typescript; Utrecht 1980) 
 
Kok, M., 'Cartografie van de firma Van Keulen' in: E.O. van Keulen et al. eds., 'In de Gekroonde 
Lootsman'. Het kaarten-, boekuitgevers en instrumentmakershuis Van Keulen te Amsterdam 
1680-1885 (Utrecht 1989) 
 
Leupe, P.A., Inventaris der verzameling kaarten berustende in het Rijksarchief. Eerste gedeelte
 
('s-Gravenhage 1867) 
 
Mil, Patrick van, and Mieke Scharloo eds., De VOC in de kaart gekeken: cartografie en navigatie 
van de Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, 1602-1799 ('s-Gravenhage 1988) 
 
Noordziek, J.J.F., Archiefwezen 1826-1852; met eene korte opgave van den inhoud van eenige 
boekerijen ('s-Gravenhage 1853) 
 
Schilder, G., 'Organization and Evolution of the Dutch East India Company's Hydrographic 
Office in the Seventeenth Century', Imago Mundi 28 (1976) 61-78 
 
Wieder, F.C., ed., Monumenta Cartographica. Reproductions of Unique and Rare Maps, Plans, 
and Views... (6 volumes; 's-Gravenhage 1925-1933) 
 
Zandvliet, K., 'Golden Opportunities in Geopolitics, Cartography and the Dutch East India 
Company during the Lifetime of Abel Tasman' in: W. Eisler and B. Smith eds., Terra 
Australis/The Furthest Shore (Sydney 1988) 67-82 
 
Zandvliet, K., 'Joan Blaeu's Boeck vol kaerten en beschrijvingen
 van de Oostindische 
Compagnie ...' in: J.E. Huisken and F. Lammertse eds., Het kunstbedrijf van de familie 
Vingboons. Schilders, architecten en kaartmakers in de gouden eeuw (Maarssen etc. 1989) 59-
95 
 
 